EVERYONE TO THE WEDNESDAY,
NOVEMBER 16TH, 20 TWENTY TO
ELECTRONIC MEETING OF THE ANN
ARBOR TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION, THIS MEETING IS
BEING HELD ELECTRONICALLY TO
PROTECT PUBLIC HEALTH AND
SAFETY.
WE INTEND TO CONDUCT THIS
MEETING SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE VIA
TELEPHONE OR ZOOME ONLY TO
SPEAK DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
COMMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE AND ENTER MEETING IID
NINE SIX ZERO TWO TWO THREE TWO
EIGHT TWO ZERO ZERO OR JOINED
BY THE ZOOME LINK.
ALL RIGHT I&apos;LL NOW ASK RAYMOND
TO CALL THE OR ASK CHRIS TO
CALL THE ROLL ACTUALLY OR IS IT
OH NOW KHORRAM RECEIVE GRETZ
FROM COMMISSIONER MARGOLESE WHO
IS NOT ABLE TO ATTEND PLEASE
STAY HERE AND FROM WHERE YOU&apos;RE
DIALING WHEN YOUR NAME IS
CALLED COMMISSIONAIRE BOLLON
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER BRIGS AND I JUST
RECEIVED A TEXT FROM COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGGS THAT SHE&apos;S
RUNNING A LITTLE LATE BECAUSE
THE AIRPORT COMMITTEE THAT
SHE&apos;S GOING ALONG SO SHE&apos;LL BE
JOINING US ABOUT FIFTEEN
MINUTES.
&gt;&gt; SHE THINKS COMMISSIONER
BRABIN FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER MICHY HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER LOOK
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER AKELA FROM ANN
ARBOR, COMMISSIONER KLIMAN,
YOU&apos;RE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONAIRE HERE FROM ANN
ARBOR COMMISSIONAIRE SMITH
SMITH SPEAKING NOW, RIGHT?
YEAH, THAT&apos;S MY FAULT.
&gt;&gt; SORRY.
SORRY.
AND LESLIE COMMISSIONAIRE AND
ONE COME HERE FROM OK, I
BELIEVE WE ARE IN A QUORUM.
GREAT.
THANKS SO MUCH.
ALL RIGHT.
SO THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON THE
CONSENT AGENDA APPROVAL OF THE
AGENDA AND APPROVAL OF THE
MINUTES FROM LAST MONTH FOR US.
WE GOT YOU.
YEAH.
AND THEN ALSO SORRY CHRIS.
&gt;&gt; WE ALSO GO THROUGH THE
NON-VOTING MEMBERS AS WELL.
MY APOLOGIES.
&gt;&gt; COMMISSIONER HESS HERE FROM
ANN ARBOR, COMMISSIONER
HUTCHINSON HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
AND LIEUTENANT MIKE SCHERBA IS
ABSENT AND THE COMMISSIONER
STUKA IS ALSO UPSET.
OK, I BELIEVE THAT&apos;S EVERYONE
THINKS OK, SO CONSENT AGENDA,
APPROVAL OF TONIGHT&apos;S AGENDA,
APPROVAL OF LAST MONTH&apos;S
MINUTES.
&gt;&gt; ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATIONS
TO THE CONSENT AGENDA?
&gt;&gt; OK, IS THERE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
PRESENTED BY THOSE TO APPROVE?
I SAW COMMISSIONER LEE AND THEN
SECONDED BY JULIE.
OK, ALL THOSE IN FAVOR
PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR HANDS OR
SAY YES IF YOU&apos;RE ON AUDIO.
YES, GREAT.
ALL THOSE OPPOSED OR NO GREAT
MOTION PASSES.
OK BECAUSE THAT AGENDA IS
APPROVED NEXT WE&apos;RE MOVING ON
TO PUBLIC COMMENT SO THIS IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR PEOPLE TO SPEAK
FOR UP TO THREE MINUTES.
PLEASE CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE
THREE SEVEN NINE SEVEN TWO
THREE AND ENTER MEETING ID
NUMBER NINE SIX ZERO TWO TWO
THREE TWO EIGHT TWO ZERO ZERO
OR CONNECT VIA ZOOM AS
DESCRIBED ON THE AGENDA SEE
WILL SELECT CALLERS THAT HAVE
RAISED THEIR HAND ONE BY ONE
USING THE LAST THREE DIGITS
OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER OR YOUR
ZOOM ID IN ORDER TO RAISE YOUR
HAND PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON
YOUR PHONE OR SELECT THE RAISED
HAND BUTTON IN ZOOM YOU&apos;LL HEAR
AN AUTOMATED ANNOUNCEMENT THAT
THE HOST IS ALLOWING YOU TO
SPEAK.
DO WE HAVE ANY PUBLIC COMMENTS
?
WE DO ADAM.
I HAVE GONE AHEAD AND ALLOWED
YOU TO SPEAK GO MUTE YOURSELF
ON THE FLOOR IS YOURS.
&gt;&gt; HELLO THIS IS ADAM
JUSZKIEWICZ FROM THE FOURTH
WARD.
I&apos;M CALLING IN SUPPORT OF THE
RESOLUTION TO INCREASE ALT FUND
PERCENTAGE AS A CITY WE&apos;VE
COMMITTED A NUMBER TO A NUMBER
OF GOALS INCLUDING
CARBON NEUTRALITY CUTTING
VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED IN HALF
AND ELIMINATING DEATHS AND
DEBILITATING INJURIES DUE TO
TRAFFIC VIOLENCE.
IF WE ARE SERIOUS ABOUT MEETING
THESE GOALS WE NEED TO PUT OUR
MONEY WHERE OUR MOUTH IS AND
ACTUALLY FUND THE
INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS
THAT WILL ENABLE US TO MEET
THOSE COMMITMENTS.
THIS IS A NEEDED, RESPONSIBLE,
REASONABLE AND OVERDUE CHANGE.
&gt;&gt; IF ANYTHING IT DOESN&apos;T GO
FAR ENOUGH BUT EVERY LITTLE BIT
HELPS.
PLEASE APPROVE THIS TONIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THANKS ADAM.
ANY OTHER COMMENTS NOT SEEING
ANY OTHER HANDS RAISED AT THE
MOMENT?
OK, GREAT THEN LET&apos;S SEE HERE
MOVING ON TO BUSINESS WHICH IS
THE RESOLUTION TO RECOMMEND
INCREASING THE ALFOND
PERCENTAGE.
SO IN THE PACKET IS A
RESOLUTION THAT I DRAFTED WITH
RAYMOND&apos;S HELP.
THE RECOMMENDS THAT CITY
COUNCIL SET ASIDE A LARGER
PERCENTAGE OF OUR
TRANSPORTATION TAX DOLLARS FOR
NON MOTORIZED IMPROVEMENTS.
SO THIS IS WE TALKED ABOUT THIS
LAST MONTH.
I THINK IT MIGHT BE EASIEST
MAYBE TO JUST READ THE
RESOLUTION BUT THE CURRENT SET
ASIDE THIS IS SPECIFICALLY FOR
ACT FIFTY ONE OR WE JUST SAY TO
ONE YEAH TAXES.
&gt;&gt; OK, THANK YOU FOR NOT SO
CURRENTLY THE PERCENTAGE IS
FIVE PERCENT FOR THE ALT FUND
WHICH IS BASICALLY EVERYONE NOT
IN A CAR AND THE DRAFT THAT
WE&apos;VE GOT HERE WOULD RECOMMEND
BUMPING THIS UP TO TWENTY
PERCENT.
SO I WILL
JUST READ IT AND THEN
WE CAN TALK ABOUT IT AS SOON AS
I GET TO THE RIGHT WINDOW.
OK, HERE WE ARE WHEREAS AS A
PART OF THE ZERO SUSTAINABILITY
PLAN AND ARBOR HAS COMMITTED TO
REDUCING MOTOR VEHICLE MILES
TRAVELED BY 50 PERCENT BY 20 30
IN ORDER TO HELP ACHIEVE
CARBON NEUTRALITY WHEREAS A
PART OF THE TWENTY TWENTY
MOVING TOGETHER TOWARD VISION
ZERO COMPREHENSIVE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND ARBER
HAS COMMITTED TO REDUCING
SERIOUS AND FATAL MOTOR VEHICLE
CRASHES TO ZERO WHEREAS ANN
ARBOR SETS ASIDE FIVE PERCENT
BACK FIFTY ONE GAS TAX WHICH
AMOUNTS TO APPROXIMATELY FIVE
HUNDRED THOUSAND DOLLARS IN THE
ANNUAL BUDGET WHEREAS IN
ARBOR&apos;S ROAD FUNDING MECHANISMS
ARE NOT ALIGNED WITH OUR
CLIMATE AND SAFETY GOALS GIVEN
THAT IT CURRENTLY ALLOCATES
NINETY FIVE PERCENT OF GAS TAX
FUNDS ON INFRASTRUCTURE FOR
CARS AND ONLY FIVE PERCENT ON
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PEOPLE
RESOLVED THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION REQUESTS THAT IN THE
UPCOMING BUDGET CYCLE CITY
COUNCIL ADJUSTS THE DIVISION
OF THE ACTIVITY ON TAX GAS TAX
FUNDS TO 80 PERCENT FOR STREETS
AND ROADS AND 20 PERCENT FOR
THE TOP FUND.
&gt;&gt; SO THAT IS THE RESOLUTION
AND I THOUGHT MAYBE TO KICK US
OFF RAYMOND COULD EXPLAIN A
LITTLE BIT ABOUT WHAT THE FUND
CURRENTLY PAYS FOR SURE THING.
&gt;&gt; SO YOU I DON&apos;T KNOW HOW LONG
THIS HAS BEEN IN PLACE BUT IT&apos;S
BEEN IN PLACE FOR QUITE SOME
TIME.
YOU KNOW, FIRST OF ALL, I THINK
WHAT SHOULD BE NOTED HERE IS
THAT THE CITY ACTUALLY DOESN&apos;T
SET ASIDE FOR ALL FUND.
MOST COMMUNITIES PROBABLY DO
NOT.
SO THE FACT THAT WE AT LEAST
HAVE SOME FUND IS AT LEAST A
STEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION.
HISTORICALLY THAT MONEY WENT
TOWARDS INFRASTRUCTURE PROJECTS
,MOST NOTABLY THE TWO THAT
COME TO MIND SINCE I&apos;VE BEEN AT
THE CITY WE HAD PIGGY BANKS
SEVERAL YEARS OF OLD FUND TO
HELP PROVIDE THE LOCAL MATCH
FOR THE ALLEN CREEK.
BUT I&apos;M OPENING THIS IS THE
TUNNEL THAT GOES UNDER THE
RAILROAD TRACKS THAT CONNECTS
TO THE BORDER BORDER TRAIL OVER
THERE BY THE HURON RIVER.
THAT WAS A HUGE PROJECT.
&gt;&gt; WE USED A LOT OF FEDERAL
FUNDS IT TRANSPORTATION
ALTERNATIVE PROGRAM FUNDS, TAP
FUNDS AND IT&apos;S USED THIS WAS
USED AS THE LOCAL MATCH AND
ALSO HELPED WITH SOME OF THE
COST OVERRUNS AS WELL.
NOTES ON THAT PROJECT.
THERE WAS ALSO A PROJECT A
COUPLE OF YEARS AGO WHERE THE
MILLER BIKE LANE WAS RESURFACED
JUST BY ITSELF, NOT THE FULL
ROAD RESURFACING BIKE LANE WAS
IN POOR CONDITION AND SO WE
WENT IN AND RESURFACED KIND
OF A JUST THE STRIP OF BIKE
LANE AND THAT THE WHOLE THING
WAS USED FOR.
HOWEVER, OVER TIME THE
PURCHASING POWER OF FUN HAS
SOMEWHAT DIMINISHED BECAUSE AS
WE PUT IN MORE BIKE FACILITIES
THAT OFTEN HELPS PAY FOR
MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES WHEN
PUBLIC WORKS GOES OUT AND
SWEEPS AND SNOW PLOWS BIKE
LANES, THEY CHARGE THAT TO THE
FUND BECAUSE IT DOES HELP
MAINTAIN THOSE FACILITIES.
AND SO TO A CERTAIN EXTENT
WE&apos;RE MAYBE A VICTIM OF OUR
SUCCESS WHERE THE MORE OF THESE
FACILITIES WE PUT IN, THE MORE
THE BIGGER PIECE OF THE PIE
NEEDS TO GO TO THOSE
MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
&gt;&gt; AND SO WE ACTUALLY HAVE LESS
ABILITY TO KIND OF PUT ALL FUND
TOWARDS CAPITAL PROJECTS OR
EVEN KIND OF BANKROLL IT YEAR
OVER YEAR AND NOW LUCKILY THERE
ARE MAYBE SOME OTHER FUNDING
SOURCES ON THE HORIZON THAT CAN
HELP FILL GAPS.
I THINK YOU&apos;VE ALL HEARD ME
REPORT IN THE PAST WHERE ARPA
IS GOING TO BE SOMETHING THAT
WE&apos;RE GOING TO BE DRAWING DOWN.
&gt;&gt; BUT LONG TERM THERE&apos;S THERE
IS THIS KIND OF GAP WITH THE
OLD FUND IN TERMS OF ITS
ABILITY TO FUND MORE NON
MOTORIZED INFRASTRUCTURE.
DOES THAT HELP MOLLY?
WOULD YOU LIKE MORE CONTEXT?
YEAH, NO, THAT&apos;S GREAT AND IT
SOUNDS LIKE I THINK I&apos;D
FORGOTTEN THAT IT&apos;S ALSO USED
FOR MAINTENANCE AND THAT THAT&apos;S
MAYBE HOW THIS ORIGINALLY CAME
UP IN OUR CONVERSATIONS WAS
BECAUSE OF THE QUESTIONS AROUND
SNOP PLOWING SEPARATED BIKE
LANES AND SO INCREASING FUNDING
FOR THE OLD FUND WOULD ALSO
WOULD MEAN INCREASING FUNDING
FOR MAINTAINING SEPARATED
FACILITIES WHEN WE GET THOSE
THAT RIGHT.
INDEED, YES.
OK, GREAT QUESTIONS, COMMENTS,
THOUGHTS ABOUT THIS.
&gt;&gt; JULIE JUST I JUST HAVE A
TEENY FRIENDLY COMMENT.
I LIKE THIS A LOT WHEN I READ I
GUESS IT&apos;S PARAGRAPH THREE
WHEREAS ANN ARBOR SETS ASIDE
FIVE PERCENT OF ACT I, I DIDN&apos;T
UNDERSTAND AT THAT POINT WHAT
SET ASIDE MEANT I WAS SET ASIDE
FOR WHAT AND IT WAS ONLY WITH
THE FOURTH PARAGRAPH THAT I
SORT OF FIGURED OUT WHAT YOU
WERE SAYING.
&gt;&gt; SO I DON&apos;T KNOW IF YOU WANT
TO ADD SOMETHING THERE LIKE
SETS ASIDE FIVE PERCENT OF FOR
ALTERNATE NOTARIZED SOMETHING
LIKE THAT.
THAT AMENDMENT IS FRIENDLY.
SO CAN WE JUST ADD RAMAN&apos;S
SET-ASIDE?
YEAH, FIVE PERCENT OF ACTIVE
JOONGANG FOR NON MOTORIZED
TRANSPORTATION.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
YEAH THANKS JULIE.
SORRY THAT WAS THE THIRD
WHEREAS YEAH SO WHEREAS IN OUR
SETS ASIDE FIVE PERCENT
OF ACTIVITY ON GAS TAX FOR NON
MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION WHICH
AMOUNTS TO APPROXIMATELY
HUNDRED THOUSAND OTHER COMMENTS
OR QUESTIONS
JULIE OH YOUR
MUTED DO YOU WANT TO SAY
ANYTHING ABOUT HOW YOU CAME UP
WITH THIS PARTICULAR PERCENTAGE
?
YES, BASICALLY I WENT WITH WHAT
I THOUGHT WE COULD GET CITY
COUNCIL TO PASS AND DOUBLED IT
AND THAT WAS YOU KNOW, I THINK
I THINK THE BUDGET IS A
NEGOTIATION ALWAYS AND THERE
ARE A LOT OF DIFFERENT
COMPETING NEEDS FOR THE CITY
AND I KNOW THAT THERE ARE SOME
FOLKS ON COUNCIL WHO CARE A LOT
ABOUT FIXING THE ROADS.
BUT I SO I JUST DECIDED TO LIKE
ASK FOR MORE.
&gt;&gt; I THINK IF WE COULD GET 20
PERCENT THAT&apos;LL BE GREAT
BECAUSE WE WANT A LOT MORE
PROTECTED BIKE LANES AND WE&apos;RE
GOING TO NEED TO PLOW THEM AND
WE WANT TO BUILD THEM AND I I
THINK THAT 80 20 LOOKS A LOT
MORE LIKE A BALANCE THAT
MATCHES OUR VALUES THAN NINETY
FIVE AND FIVE.
IT&apos;S ALSO TO ME IT ALSO
REFLECTS THE FACT THAT NON NON
MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION
PROJECTS ARE OFTEN MUCH CHEAPER
THAT YOU CAN THE DOLLAR GOES A
LOT FARTHER ON THOSE PROJECTS
NOT ALWAYS BUT BUT SO IT&apos;S ALSO
REFLECTING THAT LIKE YES I
RECOGNIZE THE MOTORIZED
TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS ARE
OFTEN BIGGER AND MORE
EXPENSIVE.
SO IT&apos;S NOT YOU KNOW, I DIDN&apos;T
ASK FOR FIFTY FIFTY PETE I
WOULD LIKE TO POINT OUT THAT IN
TWENTY SIXTEEN WASHINGTON
COUNTY INCLUDING CITY OUR PAST
A MILLAGE FOR ROADWORK AND IT
WAS CLEARLY COMMUNICATED BEFORE
THAT VILLAGE THAT TWENTY
PERCENT IT WAS GOING TO BE SET
ASIDE FOR NON MOTORIZED
TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS IN THE
COUNTY AND IT PASSED EASILY AND
THAT&apos;S AN INDICATION TO ME AT
THAT THAT THIS 80 20 RATIO
MAKES SENSE TO A LOT OF US IN
THE COMMUNITY.
AND I&apos;LL ALSO SAY THAT WAS SIX
YEARS AGO SO MAYBE MAYBE THAT
TWENTY YEARS MAYBE THERE&apos;S
MAYBE THERE&apos;S APPETITE FOR EVEN
MORE THAN TWENTY NOW SIX YEARS
AFTER AFTER THAT WAS APPROVED
WASHTENAW COUNTY SO TWENTY IS A
GOOD STARTING POINT AS FAR AS
I&apos;M CONCERNED.
MOLLY LARRY HAS HIS HAND UP.
&gt;&gt; OK, GREAT.
LARRY DICKINSON DOES THIS ALSO
INCLUDE CROSSWALK MAINTENANCE
AND MAINTENANCE AND THAT SORT
OF THING?
&gt;&gt; YEAH, IT DEFINITELY CAN WHEN
WE USE ALL THE FUN WE NOW WE
HAVE LOTS OF DIFFERENT POTS
OF FUNDING THAT WE TAP INTO.
SO THERE IS SOME CROSSWALK SET
ASIDE THAT WE HAVE FOR FROM THE
I BELIEVE THAT&apos;S THE STREET
MILEAGE IS THAT RIGHT NICK OR
THE CROSSWALK FUNDING COMES
FROM SO BUT YEAH WE CAN TEND TO
KIND OF MIX MATCH DEPENDING
UPON WHICH PART OF FUNDING WE
HAVE AVAILABLE THE SCALE OF THE
PROJECT IF WE NEED TO KIND
OF LEVERAGE DIFFERENT FUNDING
SOURCES.
BUT YEAH, THIS ALL FUND CAN
DEFINITELY GO TOWARDS CROSSWALK
IMPROVEMENTS AND PEDESTRIAN
IMPROVEMENTS.
I DON&apos;T THINK
COUNCIL MEMBER
BRIDGES I WANTED TO GIVE YOU A
CHANCE TO JUMP IN IF YOU NEED
TO GET CAUGHT UP.
WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT THE
RESOLUTION TO INCREASE THE FUND
ALLOCATION FROM FIVE PERCENT TO
TWENTY PERCENT.
YEAH, AND SORRY TO JOIN LATE I
WAS AN AIRPORT ADVISORY
COMMISSION SO I WAS THINKING
TRANSPORTATION THE DIFFERENT
PART OF OUR OUR NETWORK SO
SORRY TO GO BACK AND THE
COMMENTS EARLIER YOU KNOW I
OBVIOUSLY I BELIEVE WE NEED TO
ALIGN OUR FUNDING WITH OUR
TRANSPORTATION GOALS.
I DO THINK THAT ONE OF THE
CHALLENGES THAT I HAVE A LITTLE
BIT FROM FROM MY ROLE IS
UNDERSTANDING WE&apos;RE PULLING
FROM A VARIETY OF DIFFERENT
POTS TO DO THIS AND WE&apos;VE SEEN
THIS IN OUR PREVIOUS
PRESENTATIONS AROUND THE BUDGET
AND I THINK SOME OF SOMETIMES
WE&apos;RE WE&apos;RE NOT EVEN THERE ARE
THERE ARE CASES WE&apos;RE NOT EVEN
CLEAR INTERNALLY IN TERMS
OF HOW MUCH OF A PROJECT IS
REALLY GOING TO NON NOTARIZED
VERSUS MOTORIST&apos;S SOMETIMES A
LITTLE DIFFICULT TO DISTINGUISH
.
ARE THOSE IS THAT PAIN ON THE
ROAD FOR THE BIKE LANES OR IS
IT THERE FOR THE CARS?
SO YOU KNOW, I THINK NEED TO
CAREFULLY THINK ABOUT HOW WE&apos;RE
DOING THIS AND HOW IT IMPACTS
HOW INTERACTS WITH OUR NEW
MILEAGE FOR THE CLIMATE ACTION
MILEAGE AND MORE THE FUNDING
COMING IN THERE.
BUT IT&apos;S DEFINITELY A
CONVERSATION WE NEED TO BE
HAVING AT BUDGET TIME.
SO I RESPECT DESIRE FOR
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION TO
SHIFT MORE FUNDING TOWARDS OUR
STATED PRIORITIES.
RIGHT.
THANKS.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
HEY THANKS.
OVERALL I THINK THIS IS ALL
ABOUT I&apos;M IN SUPPORT OF THIS.
THE THING THAT I WANT TO KIND
OF UNDERSTAND IS WHAT IS THE
KIND OF OPPORTUNITY COST WITH
RESPECT TO THE ONE AND A HALF
MILLION DOLLARS THAT WOULD BE
REDIRECTED.
SO I MEAN LIKE WHAT ARE THE
KIND OF INCREMENTAL COSTS
ASSOCIATED WITH THAT?
SO I MEAN IS IT DOES IT MEAN
SEVEN DOESN&apos;T GET PAVED OR
SOMETHING LIKE THAT?
RIGHT.
SO I DON&apos;T REALLY HAVE A GOOD
SENSE OF THAT SCALE AND WHAT
THAT ONE AND A HALF MILLION DO
I MEAN AGAIN I THINK I&apos;VE SAID
IT HERE.
I&apos;VE SAID IT ON PLANNING
STRENGTHENING NON MOTORIZED
TRANSIT SHOULD BE AT LEAST THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE SHOULD BE A
PRIORITY OF OURS FROM AN EQUITY
STANDPOINT.
FROM AN ACCESS STANDPOINT WE
WANT TO CREATE ADDITIONAL
CAPACITY SO I THINK ON
PRINCIPLE I&apos;M CERTAINLY IN
SUPPORT OF THIS.
I JUST DON&apos;T HAVE A VERY GOOD
SENSE OF WHAT THAT OPPORTUNITY
COST.
SO I DON&apos;T KNOW IF THERE&apos;S
SOMETHING THAT YOU COULD SHARE
AS FAR AS AND I KNOW THAT YOU
HAD SAID THAT THE PERCENTAGES
WERE PREDICATED ON WHAT YOU
THOUGHT YOU WOULD GET COUNCIL
TO PASS WITH IT AND OBVIOUSLY
THAT PLAYS INTO IT AS A
NEGOTIATION TACTIC BUT JUST
TRYING TO GET IT ALSO KIND
OF AN UNDERPINNING OF WHAT IS
THAT OPPORTUNITY COST.
YEAH, YEAH.
I MEAN I THINK THE 80 THE 80 20
DIVISION THAT PETER WAS
DESCRIBING EARLIER IS IT&apos;S
BECOMING SOMETHING THAT WE SEE
ELSEWHERE.
SO YOU KNOW, THERE WERE THERE
OTHER REASONS TOO.
BUT I&apos;LL LET RAYMOND SPEAK TO
WHAT WHAT THAT MONEY MIGHT HAVE
BEEN GOING TO IF WE WERE
ALLOCATING IT.
HOW WE HAPPEN.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, WELL, I DON&apos;T THINK I
HAVE THE BEST ANSWER BECAUSE
THE OTHER PART OF ACTIVITY ONE
IS A PART OF FUNDING THAT I
HAVE FINGERPRINTS ON PERSAY IF
I&apos;M NOT MISTAKEN AND MAYBE NICK
CAN HELP ME OR MAYBE EVEN IF
ERICA KNOWS I THINK I THINK A
LOT OF THE STREET MAINTENANCE
ACTIVITIES ARE FUNDED WITH AT
FIFTY ONE.
SO THAT&apos;S WHERE WE SEE POTHOLE
FILLING WHERE YOU SEE ROAD
PLOWING, WHERE YOU SEE STREET
SWEEPING.
I THINK ALL OF THOSE ACTIVITIES
ARE COVERED UNDER ACTIVITY ONE
IN TERMS OF THE IMPACT OF IF
YOU KNOW HYPOTHETICALLY THIS
ONE FROM FIVE PERCENT TO TWENTY
PERCENT TO ALL FUND THERE WOULD
BE LESS MONEY IN THE REST
OF THE PIE FOR THOSE
ACTIVITIES.
I DON&apos;T KNOW IF YOU KNOW
OPERATIONALLY WHAT THAT IMPACT
WOULD BE.
I DON&apos;T KNOW IF IT WOULD JUST
MEAN MAYBE STREET SWEEPING LESS
OR MAYBE THERE&apos;S LESS CARRY
FORWARD BALANCE.
I KNOW THAT&apos;S ANOTHER THING
THAT A LOT OF OUR FUNDS DO IF
WE DON&apos;T DRAW IT ALL DOWN ONE
YEAR.
THE OTHER THING I&apos;VE HEARD FROM
BOTH MARTY PACHON, OUR CFO AND
MOLLY MOCHIZUKI, OUR PUBLIC
WORKS DIRECTOR IS A LOT
OF THOSE MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES
ARE HIGHLY VARIABLE, ESPECIALLY
DEPENDENT UPON SNOWFALL.
SO IF WE HAVE A VERY HEAVY SNOW
YEAR THEY TEND TO BE OVER
BUDGET ON THEIR PLOWING BECAUSE
IT WAS JUST UNANTICIPATED.
IT&apos;S REALLY HARD TO KIND
OF CRYSTAL BALL HOW MUCH LABOR
YOU NEED ON EVERY WINTER.
BUT IF IT&apos;S A LIGHT YEAR WE
MIGHT HAVE TO CARRY FORWARD
BALANCE.
SO UM SO I COULD MAYBE TRY TO
FOLLOW UP WITH THE MIGHTY ON
THE CFO AND GIVE YOU SOME
ADDITIONAL DETAILS ON TERMS
OF WHAT THAT TRADE OFF MIGHT
LOOK LIKE.
NO, I APPRECIATE THAT IT&apos;S
PROBABLY NOT A VERY CLEAR
ANSWER EITHER.
RIGHT FROM THE STANDPOINT
THERE&apos;S JUST A LOT OF THE FEW
AREAS IN WHICH THAT NINETY FIVE
PERCENT MAY BE HEADED TOWARDS.
SO JUST TRYING TO BETTER
UNDERSTAND AGAIN I THINK THE
PRIORITY IS STRENGTHENING.
I MEAN OBVIOUSLY A NINETY FIVE
TO FIVE PERCENT RATIO JERRY IT
DOESN&apos;T SEEM TO ALIGN WITH THE
VALUES THAT WE HAVE TRIED TO
PUT FORTH AS A COMMUNITY.
SO AGAIN I&apos;M IN FAVOR OF THIS.
IT WAS JUST SIMPLY ME TRYING TO
BETTER UNDERSTAND THE TRADE
OFFS ASSOCIATED.
THANK YOU.
I&apos;LL BE IN SUPPORT.
THANKS.
THANKS AND JUST REAL QUICKLY
SORRY TO DO YOU TYPICALLY DON&apos;T
TAP FIFTY ONE FOR CAPITAL
PROJECTS RIGHT.
WE USE STREET KNOWLEDGE AND
OTHER SOURCES FOR THAT AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; WE DO FOR WE DO FOR OUR
CAPITAL PREVENTATIVE
MAINTENANCE PROJECTS OR THINGS
LIKE DOING THE CAPE SEALS AND
THE SEALS TO MAINTAIN YOU KNOW
THE CONDITION OF A PAYMENT
THAT&apos;S IN GOOD SHAPE WHICH IS
KIND OF KEY FOR OUR ASSET
MANAGEMENT STRATEGY.
&gt;&gt; BUT THE MAJOR ROAD REPAVING
PROJECTS ARE GENERALLY FUNDED
OUT OF THE STREET MILEAGE.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
SO THERE&apos;S ANOTHER POSSIBLE
IMPACT THAT SOME OF THAT
PREVENTIVE MAINTENANCE MIGHT
TAKE A YEAH.
AND OVERALL I&apos;D SAY THAT THE
ANSWER USUALLY WHEN THESE TYPES
OF QUESTIONS COME UP THERE&apos;S
NOT IMMEDIATE DEFINED ANSWERS
OF WELL IF MORE MONEY GOES FROM
FIFTY ONE TO HERE THAN WHAT YOU
KNOW WHAT WOULD YOU NEED TO GET
CUT AND USUALLY ANSWERS WELL
SOMETHING NEEDS TO GET CUT BUT
THERE&apos;S USUALLY NOT LIKE WELL
IT&apos;S JUST GOING TO COME FROM
HERE THAT SOMEBODY AT SOME
POINT WILL NEED TO FIGURE OUT
WHAT ACTIVITIES WE DON&apos;T DO IF
THE MONEY GOES ELSEWHERE OR
WHAT WE DO LESS OF .
&gt;&gt; SO IT&apos;S PROBABLY NOT GOING
TO GET AN IMMEDIATE CLEAR
ANSWER ABOUT WE WON&apos;T DO THIS
IF THE MONEY GOES HERE INSTEAD
IT&apos;S GOT TO BE KIND OF AN
ITERATIVE PROCESS.
SO THINK THANK I APPRECIATE
ERIKA I MEAN INTO THAT POINT I
THINK IT&apos;S IT&apos;S GOOD FOR US TO
HAVE AN UNDERSTANDING OF , YOU
KNOW, THE BIG PICTURE HOW THE
FUNDING IS GETTING ALLOCATED
BECAUSE THAT&apos;S REALLY WHAT
WE&apos;RE WE&apos;RE TALKING ABOUT IN
TERMS OF HOW IS OUR
TRANSPORTATION BUDGET GETTING
ALIGNED WITH OUR TRANSPORTATION
GOALS AND SOME HAVING
FLEXIBILITY IN HOW SOME
OF THOSE FUNDS GET SPENT.
IT MAY BE MORE IMPORTANT THAT
ONE FUND IS ALIGNED A LITTLE
BIT MORE ONE DIRECTION, ANOTHER
FUND IS ALIGNED OR ANOTHER
DIRECTION.
BUT IN GENERAL I SUPPORT THIS.
THE ONE AREA THAT I MIGHT ASK
THAT THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION THINK ABOUT MAKING
JUST A SMALL LITTLE TWEAK TO
THE RESOLUTION THAT&apos;S GOING TO
COUNCIL IS IN THE LAST WHEREAS
CLAUSE WHERE IT SAYS WHEREAS
ANTIPAS ROAD FUNDING MECHANISMS
ARE NOT ALIGNED WITH OUR
CLIMATE AND SAFETY GOALS AND
THEN AFTER THE COMMA GIVEN THAT
IT CURRENTLY ALLOCATES NINETY
FIVE PERCENT OF THE GAS TAX
FUNDS AND INFRASTRUCTURE FOR
CARS AND ONLY FIVE PERCENT ON
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR PEOPLE AND I
WOULD SUGGEST THAT I UNDERSTAND
KIND OF THE THE SENTIMENT
BEHIND THAT.
I DO THINK THAT THERE&apos;S PEOPLE
IN EACH OF THOSE VEHICLES.
THERE&apos;S A FEW PEOPLE IN
TRANSIT, THERE&apos;S PEOPLE IN
CARS, THERE ARE PEOPLE ON
BIKES, THERE ARE PEOPLE ON FOOT
.
SO IT MIGHT BE MORE PERSUASIVE
WHEREAS CLAUSE IF IT JUST
STOPPED THEM AT THE GOALS BUT
JUST MY INPUT I I WILL LOOK TO
THEM WHATEVER THE WISDOM THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION IS ON
THIS AND I CAN TAKE OTHER
FEEDBACK ABOUT ABOUT THAT CAUSE
CANCER COUNCIL DOESN&apos;T HAVE TO
PRODUCE THIS LANGUAGE WHEN THEY
MAKE THEIR OWN DECISION ABOUT
THIS AND I&apos;M JUST THINKING
OF FOLKS WHO ARE WHO ARE ACROSS
THE COMMUNITY WHO MIGHT BE
READING DENHA JULIE OH YOU&apos;RE
MUTA YOU&apos;RE SORT OF IN LINE
WITH THAT.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M SORT OF CONFUSED ABOUT
WHAT IT ALL MEANS LIKE TO THAT
INCLUDE DOES THAT INCLUDE
SIDEWALKS, SNOW REMOVAL?
WHAT DOES WHAT DOES THAT
INCLUDE AND IS SO CONNECTED TO
THAT IS THIS CARS VERSUS PEOPLE
DIVISION?
YOU KNOW LIKE IT&apos;S NOT JUST
CARS EITHER BUT FIRE TRUCKS AND
AMBULANCES AND BUSSES AND
THINGS LIKE THAT TOO.
YEAH, RAYMOND, MAYBE I DON&apos;T
ACTUALLY KNOW WHAT ENCOMPASSES
ALZ.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
SO I THINK THE IDEA BEHIND ALL
WAS REALLY THE NON MOTORIZED
TRANSPORTATION ELEMENTS SO AND
AGAIN IT WAS ESTABLISHED BEFORE
MY TIME SO I ADMITTEDLY HAVEN&apos;T
LOOKED AT THE ENABLING SET
ASIDE CARVEOUT LANGUAGE THAT
ESTABLISHED THIS ONE BUT THE
WAY I&apos;VE ALWAYS BEEN TOLD IS IT
PRETTY MUCH GOES TO BIKE AND
PEAD INFRASTRUCTURE HISTORIC.
WE HAVE NOT FUNDED TRANSIT
IMPROVEMENTS AS THE RIDE IS
RESPONSIBLE FOR THOSE NOW WE DO
TRY TO COORDINATE WITH PROJECTS
WHERE THERE IS OVERLAP AND
INTERPLAY BETWEEN A TRANSIT
STOP FOR EXAMPLE.
BUT A LOT OF TIMES THE TRANSIT
ELEMENTS ARE ARE FUNDED BY
TRANSIT AND THEN IN TERMS
OF LIKE EMERGENCY RESPONDERS
WITH FEW EXCEPTIONS WE YOU
KNOW, THEY&apos;RE JUST CONSIDERED A
ROAD USER VEHICLE.
NOW SOMETIMES WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT
SPECIAL SIGNAL THINGS BUT BY
AND LARGE I DON&apos;T THINK AND
MAYBE NICK YOU KNOW BETTER THAN
I DO YOU KNOW, I DON&apos;T KNOW
THAT WE TREAT ANY DIFFERENTLY
IF IT&apos;S AN EMERGENCY RESPONSE
RALLIES OR ANYTHING LIKE THAT
IN TERMS OF LIKE SERVICE THAT
WE USE OR TREATMENTS OR
ANYTHING LIKE THAT.
NO, WE DO NOT KNOW CULTURALLY
THAT YEAH.
&gt;&gt; I MEAN I&apos;M JUST THINKING
BACK TO THE PRESENTATION OF THE
BUS MILEAGE AND THINKING THAT
EVEN IF WE GIVE TRIPLE-A TO ALL
THAT MONEY, IF THE CITY DOES
NOTHING TO SORT OF HELP MAKE
THAT FUNCTIONAL THAT IF IT MAY
NOT BE SUCCESSFUL, HOW DO WE
FEEL ABOUT UH NINETY FIVE
PERCENT FOR MOTOR VEHICLES AND
FIVE PERCENT FOR ALL OTHER
MODES?
ERICA, WOULD THAT GET CLOSER TO
.
YES, I THINK THAT GETS MORE TO
THE SENTIMENT OF THANKS.
&gt;&gt; SO I WILL ACCEPT THAT
AMENDMENT ALSO
I&apos;M NOT SEEING
ANY THEIR HANDS SO I&apos;M SORRY TO
INTERRUPT, LARRY.
&gt;&gt; I SEE YOUR HAND UP BUT I
DON&apos;T KNOW IF THAT WAS FROM
BEFORE I WASN&apos;T PAYING
ATTENTION.
OK, I&apos;LL ASSUME THAT&apos;S FROM
BEFORE.
OK, SO REMINDER OF THAT TWO
AMENDMENTS.
ONE OF THEM IS TO IN THE THIRD
WHEREAS CLAUSE TO MAKE IT CLEAR
WE&apos;RE IN OUR SETS ASIDE FIVE
PERCENT OF ACTUALLY JOHN GAS
TAX FUNDS FOR NON MOTORIZED
TRANSIT.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;RE ADDING FOUR NON
MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION AND
THEN THE FOURTH ONE WE&apos;RE GOING
TO CHANGE THAT LAST CLAUSE
CURRENTLY ALLOCATES NINETY FIVE
PERCENT OF GAS TAX FUNDS FOR
INFRASTRUCTURE FOR MOTOR
VEHICLES AND ONLY FIVE PERCENT
FOR ALL OTHER MODES.
SO DO I HAVE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THIS RESOLUTION AS
AMENDED I SAW FIRST DO I HAVE A
SECOND MEGAN?
ALL RIGHT.
ALL THOSE IN FAVOR PLEASE
PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND OR
SAY YES.
YES.
ALL THOSE OPPOSED ANY
ABSTENTIONS?
ALL RIGHT.
THE RESOLUTION PASSES AND WE
WILL SEND THIS OFF TO COUNCIL
THIS IS GOOD TIMING.
THEY HAVE NOT YET I BELIEVE NOT
YET.
YEAH, NO, DEFINITELY NOT.
HAVE STARTED THE BUDGET
PROCESS.
SO THIS WILL GET INTO THE
CONVERSATION RIGHT AT THE START
.
&gt;&gt; THANKS EVERYONE.
MOVING ON, WE&apos;VE GOT THE TWENTY
TWENTY THREE MEETING SCHEDULE I
THINK THIS TO ME ARRAIGNMENT&apos;S
YEAH.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;LL GO AHEAD AND SHARE THE
SCHEDULE THAT WE HAVE DRAFTED.
HOPEFULLY THIS WILL SHOW UP ALL
RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; OK SO INCLUDED IN THE PACKET
IS THIS ATTACHMENT WHICH
OUTLINES POSSIBLE MEETING
SCHEDULE FOR CALENDAR YEAR
TWENTY TWENTY THREE THE
SCHEDULE THAT YOU SEE BEFORE
YOU IT KEEPS THE SAME MEETING
CADENCE THAT YOU HAVE NOW WHICH
IS THE THIRD WEDNESDAY OF EVERY
MONTH AT SEVEN P.M. WE QUICKLY
SCAN WE DIDN&apos;T SEE ANY
POTENTIAL CONFLICTS WITH
HOLIDAYS.
THE DECEMBER MEETING THERE&apos;S
IT&apos;S A LITTLE BIT EARLIER AND
SO IT&apos;S NOT FOLLOWING THE SAME
WEEK AS CHRISTMAS LIKE IT IS
THIS YEAR.
BUT IF YOU STILL THINK THAT&apos;S
STILL A LITTLE CLOSE, WE CAN
LOOK TO MAYBE RESCHEDULE.
I WILL SAY THANKS TO CHRIS WE
DID A SCAN TO SEE IF THERE WERE
OTHER MEETING DATES AVAILABLE
AND BECAUSE THE CITY HAS A LOT
OF BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND
COMMITTEES, THERE ARE NOT A LOT
OF GOOD CHOICES AVAILABLE TO
YOU ESPECIALLY IF IT&apos;S AN AFTER
WORK HOURS TYPE MEETING.
PRETTY MUCH THE ONLY TIMES
AVAILABLE IF YOU WANT IT TO
DEVIATE FROM THIS WOULD BE
FRIDAY MEETINGS WHICH ARE
COMPLETELY OPEN MAYBE NOT
SURPRISINGLY SOME OF YOU AND WE
DID FIND SLOTS ON THE SECOND
AND FOURTH THURSDAY AT FOUR
P.M. IT WOULD BE EARLIER IN THE
DAY AND THE REASON WHY I WOULD
HAVE TO BE AT FOUR IS I BELIEVE
THERE&apos;S A SEVEN O&apos;CLOCK MEETING
ON THURSDAY.
SO THEN THIS WOULD ALLOW THE
COMMISSION TO HAVE A TWO HOUR
MEETING AND THEN SEATON AND
OTHERS TO TRANSITION TO THAT
THE SEVEN O&apos;CLOCK MEETING.
SO UNFORTUNATELY THERE AREN&apos;T A
LOT OF OPTIONS ASIDE FROM THE
MEETING THAT YOU HAVE NOW WE
CAN COME BACK WITH AN
ALTERNATIVE SCHEDULE IF YOU&apos;D
LIKE AT THE NEXT MEETING.
BUT IF YOU&apos;RE COMFORTABLE WITH
WHAT WE&apos;RE PROPOSING HERE
TONIGHT, WE ARE ASKING FOR THE
COMMISSION TO APPROVE THIS
MEETING SCHEDULE EITHER TONIGHT
OR NEXT MONTH.
SO IN THAT WAY WE CAN UPLOAD
YOUR CALENDAR WITH THE CITY
CLERK IN THE CITY CALENDAR.
THANKS, PETE.
DID YOU GET ANY FEEDBACK FROM
ANN ARBOR PUBLIC SCHOOLS ABOUT
A DAY THAT WOULD BE BETTER FOR
THEIR REPRESENTATIVE TO I HAVE
TALKED TO LIZ MARGOLIS AND I I
I HAVEN&apos;T GOT A COMMITTAL
ANSWER IF WE MOVE THE DATE
ABOUT WHETHER THEY&apos;LL
PARTICIPATE OR NOT.
SO I DON&apos;T KNOW IF MEETING OR
CHANGING MEETING DATE TO TRY TO
ACCOMMODATE IN OUR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS WILL RESULT IN BETTER
ATTENDANCE OR NOT.
NOW GRANTED THERE ARE PEOPLE,
RESIDENTS AND OTHERS THAT MIGHT
WANT TO ATTEND BOTH.
SO THEN THERE IS THERE IS AN
INHERENT CONFLICT BEYOND JUST
THE STAFF MEMBERS.
BUT AGAIN THE CHOICES EVEN IF
WE WERE TO MOVE IT TO A
DIFFERENT DATE AND TIME, THEY
ARE FAIRLY LIMITED ON OK, I
GUESS I WOULD LIKE TO SEE LIKE
THEIR VOICE TO BE HERE WITH US
TO SO IS THAT SOMETHING THAT WE
COULD TRY AND WORK OUT OVER THE
NEXT MONTH AND GO ON THIS
CALENDAR NEXT MONTH OR IS IT IN
YOUR OPINION IS IT WORTH
PUTTING EFFORT INTO OR IT
SOUNDS LIKE MAYBE MAYBE NOT THE
YEAH.
&gt;&gt; THE I&apos;M HAPPY TO TO BROACH
THE ISSUE WITH OUR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS.
&gt;&gt; THEY ARE AN EXTERNAL ENTITY
SO I DON&apos;T HAVE YOU KNOW, JUST
LIKE WE HAVE VERY RARELY HAVE
PARTICIPATION FROM OUR TO THE
UNIVERSITY AND OUR PUBLIC
SCHOOLS.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S IF THEY CHOOSE NOT TO
COME I DON&apos;T THAT&apos;S THEIR
DECISION.
OK, I ALL RIGHT.
I UNDERSTAND.
THANK YOU ERIKA.
YEAH.
AND THE SCHOOL RELATED ISSUE
THERE IS A SCHOOL CITY
TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE THAT
HASN&apos;T MET SINCE I&apos;VE BEEN IN
OFFICE THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS
.
BUT I DO THINK THAT IT WOULD BE
WORTHWHILE TO TAKE LOOK AT THE
COMPOSITION OF THAT UNDERSTAND
IF WE MIGHT BE ABLE TO
RESTRUCTURED IN A WAY THAT IT
MIGHT FEEL LIKE IT&apos;S YOU KNOW,
IF THAT&apos;S THE ISSUE IN TERMS
OF IS THERE ANY STRUCTURAL
ISSUES, ARE THERE ANY CHANGES
THERE AND THEN THINK ABOUT
MAYBE THAT HAS A LITTLE BIT
MORE FLEXIBILITY IN TERMS
OF WHEN THE MEETING TIMES COULD
BE.
MAYBE IT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT
HAPPENS DURING THE DAY BUT IT
HAS A MORE FOCUSED PURPOSE SO
THAT THOSE WHO ARE PART OF THE
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS IN
TOWN OR AT LEAST IF IT&apos;S JUST
APPS THAT IT&apos;S A MORE FOCUSED
CONVERSATION AND IT FEELS MORE
PRODUCTIVE FOR THEM.
I DO THINK THERE&apos;S SOME PRETTY
SIGNIFICANT TRANSPORTATION
ISSUES RELATED TO CITY SCHOOL
CONNECTIONS BUT I WONDER IF WE
MIGHT BE ABLE TO MOVE THEM
FORWARD IN A IN A SMALLER GROUP
OF TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
MEMBERS AND CITY SCHOOL FOLKS.
&gt;&gt; I YEAH, THAT&apos;S ANOTHER
POSSIBLE
SO IT SOUNDS LIKE I&apos;M
HEARING A DESIRE TO TRY AND
GIVE IT A MONTH SEE IF WE CAN
CHECK IN WITH THE SCHOOLS AND
SEE IF THERE&apos;S ANYTHING WE CAN
DO THAT WOULD INCREASE SCHOOL
APS STAFF PARTICIPATION IN
COMMISSION MEETINGS ASIDE FROM
THAT, DOES ANYONE SEE ANY LIKE
ANY ISSUES WITH ANY OF US
SCHEDULED MEETINGS?
&gt;&gt; I KNOW WE HAD ALSO TALKED
ABOUT MOVING IT BECAUSE OF THE
WAY THAT THIS IS RIGHT ON TOP
OF THE DISABILITY COMMISSION
MEETINGS AND SO IT MAKES IT
TOUGH FOR OUR REPRESENTATIVE
FROM THE DISABILITY COMMISSION.
THERE&apos;S LIKE A LOT OF MEETINGS
IN LIKE IN A ROW, LARRY.
I DON&apos;T KNOW I DON&apos;T WANT TO
PUT YOU ON THE SPOT ABOUT THAT
.
BUT JUST TO I DON&apos;T KNOW THAT
YOU WERE ON THE COMMISSION WHEN
WE FIRST STARTED HAVING THAT
CONVERSATION.
&gt;&gt; SO THAT&apos;S ANOTHER THING THAT
WE HAD BEEN OH, IT DOESN&apos;T
REALLY BOTHER ME THAT YEAH.
JUST A LITTLE LATER.
YEAH.
I MEAN IT&apos;S A MEETING.
IT IS A MEETING.
YEAH.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
IT IS A MEETING.
OK, THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S HELPFUL TO
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
KNOW THAT AT LEAST FOR THE
OK, THAT&apos;S THAT&apos;S HELPFUL TO
MOMENT IT WORKS FOR YOU SO
KNOW THAT AT LEAST FOR THE
WE&apos;RE GOING TO BRING IN CAN WE
MOMENT IT WORKS FOR YOU SO
BRING THIS BACK ON IN DECEMBER
WE&apos;RE GOING TO BRING IN CAN WE
IS THAT YEAH.
BRING THIS BACK ON IN DECEMBER
&gt;&gt; HAPPY TO AND THEN WHAT I CAN
IS THAT YEAH.
TRY TO DO IS BASED ON THE
&gt;&gt; HAPPY TO AND THEN WHAT I CAN
CONVERSATIONS I HAVE WITH A
TRY TO DO IS BASED ON THE
PUBLIC SCHOOLS, IF THEY DO
CONVERSATIONS I HAVE WITH A
RECOMMEND ONE OF THE OTHER TIME
PUBLIC SCHOOLS, IF THEY DO
SLOTS.
RECOMMEND ONE OF THE OTHER TIME
LET ME JUST GET A QUICK READ
SLOTS.
FROM THE GROUP HOW DIFFICULT OR
LET ME JUST GET A QUICK READ
PROBLEMATIC WOULD IT BE IF I GO
FROM THE GROUP HOW DIFFICULT OR
TO THE SCHOOLS AND SAY HEY HERE
PROBLEMATIC WOULD IT BE IF I GO
HERE THE OPTIONS RIGHT AT THE
TO THE SCHOOLS AND SAY HEY HERE
CURRENT MEETING CONFLICTS WITH
HERE THE OPTIONS RIGHT AT THE
THE SCHOOL BOARD SO WE CAN
CURRENT MEETING CONFLICTS WITH
EITHER DO FRIDAYS OR THURSDAYS
THE SCHOOL BOARD SO WE CAN
AT FOUR BUT I DON&apos;T WANT TO PUT
EITHER DO FRIDAYS OR THURSDAYS
SOMETHING ON THE TABLE TO THEM
AT FOUR BUT I DON&apos;T WANT TO PUT
IF IT&apos;S NOT ACCEPTABLE TO RIGHT
SOMETHING ON THE TABLE TO THEM
.
IF IT&apos;S NOT ACCEPTABLE TO RIGHT
SO SO IF THERE&apos;S A QUICK READ I
.
DON&apos;T KNOW IF YOU MIGHT JUST DO
SO SO IF THERE&apos;S A QUICK READ I
A QUICK HAND COUNT TO SEE WHO
DON&apos;T KNOW IF YOU MIGHT JUST DO
COULD MAKE GENERALLY A FRIDAY
A QUICK HAND COUNT TO SEE WHO
MEETING OR THURSDAY FOUR
COULD MAKE GENERALLY A FRIDAY
O&apos;CLOCK MEETING THAT MIGHT BE
MEETING OR THURSDAY FOUR
HELPFUL JUST SO I CAN NARROW
O&apos;CLOCK MEETING THAT MIGHT BE
DOWN THE CONVERSATION.
HELPFUL JUST SO I CAN NARROW
&gt;&gt; WOULD THAT BE HELPFUL, PETE
DOWN THE CONVERSATION.
?
&gt;&gt; WOULD THAT BE HELPFUL, PETE
&gt;&gt; DID YOU WANT TO SAY
?
SOMETHING OR DO WHAT ARE THE
&gt;&gt; DID YOU WANT TO SAY
PROSPECTS FOR THIS MEETING
SOMETHING OR DO WHAT ARE THE
STAYING RITUAL A FOUR O&apos;CLOCK
PROSPECTS FOR THIS MEETING
VIRTUAL MEETING IS A LOT EASIER
STAYING RITUAL A FOUR O&apos;CLOCK
FOR ME TO ACCOMMODATE AN FOUR
VIRTUAL MEETING IS A LOT EASIER
O&apos;CLOCK MEETING IN PERSON IF WE
FOR ME TO ACCOMMODATE AN FOUR
GO BACK TO IN-PERSON MEETINGS I
O&apos;CLOCK MEETING IN PERSON IF WE
WOULD OUTLOOK THERE.
GO BACK TO IN-PERSON MEETINGS I
SO I HAVE REACHED OUT TO AND I
WOULD OUTLOOK THERE.
BELIEVE CHRIS HAS AS WELL TO
SO I HAVE REACHED OUT TO AND I
THE CITY CLERK&apos;S OFFICE ASKING
BELIEVE CHRIS HAS AS WELL TO
THAT VERY QUESTION RIGHT NOW
THE CITY CLERK&apos;S OFFICE ASKING
THERE IS NO ON THERE&apos;S NO
THAT VERY QUESTION RIGHT NOW
INDICATION THAT NON REQUIRED
THERE IS NO ON THERE&apos;S NO
BOARDS WILL GO TO IN-PERSON
INDICATION THAT NON REQUIRED
MEETINGS ANY TIME AND NOT
BOARDS WILL GO TO IN-PERSON
REQUIRED BOARDS.
MEETINGS ANY TIME AND NOT
IT&apos;S NOT THE RIGHT NOMENCLATURE
REQUIRED BOARDS.
SO FORGIVE ME FOR THAT.
IT&apos;S NOT THE RIGHT NOMENCLATURE
BUT THERE ARE THOSE BOARDS AND
SO FORGIVE ME FOR THAT.
COMMISSIONS STATUTORILY
BUT THERE ARE THOSE BOARDS AND
REQUIRED TO MEET SUCH AS CITY
COMMISSIONS STATUTORILY
COUNCIL PLANNING COMMISSION AND
REQUIRED TO MEET SUCH AS CITY
TO OTHERS THEY HAVE TO MEET IN
COUNCIL PLANNING COMMISSION AND
PERSON VIA STATE LAW
ADVISORY
COMMISSION SUCH AS THIS ONE DO
NOT AND SO THE PRELIMINARY
DIRECTION I&apos;VE GOTTEN IS THAT
WE WILL CONTINUE TO MEET
VIRTUALLY FOR THE FORESEEABLE
FUTURE.
OK, MEGAN, DID YOU ALSO HAVE I
SEE YEAH.
&gt;&gt; YEAH THAT SO CONCERN IS A
GOOD ONE I THINK FOR ME WOULD
BE A LITTLE ROUGH PERSONALLY
I&apos;M OFTEN NOT DONE WITH WORK BY
THEN.
YEAH ERIKA AND THERE WILL BE A
COUNCIL MEMBER APPOINTMENTS TO
TAKE COMMISSIONS AND I I LOVE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION BUT
OTHER PEOPLE LOVE
TRANSPORTATION AS WELL SO THERE
WE HAVE TO SPREAD THE LOVE
AROUND SO I&apos;M NOT GOING TO
WEIGH IN TOO MUCH.
I WILL SAY THAT FRIDAYS ARE
OFTEN A CHALLENGING BECAUSE
OF THE AMOUNT OF COMMISSIONS
THAT FOLKS ARE APPOINTED TO
RAISE OR A CHALLENGING DAY
SOMETIMES BUT I&apos;M SURE FOLKS
WILL TRY TO MAKE IT MAKE
WHATEVER WORK OR ME VERSUS ON
FRIDAYS I CAN DO BOTH.
YES, SAME BUT THERE&apos;S DAYS
BEFORE WOULD THAT BE GREAT FOR
ME EITHER SO I DON&apos;T PART
OF THE WAITING TO TALK TO APS
WE DON&apos;T REALLY HAVE ANYWHERE
TO MOVE IT TO MIGHT JUST MEAN
THEN WE RISK NOT HAVING A
QUORUM IN DECEMBER POTENTIALLY
SINCE WE HAVEN&apos;T IT&apos;S AN
MEETING TIME THIS MONTH APES
CAN MOVE THEIR MEETINGS TO
WHENEVER THEY WANT BUT AND
THERE IS AN OPTION TO WE CAN
ALWAYS AMEND MEETING DATES
GIVEN SUFFICIENT NOTICE SO IT&apos;S
THESE THINGS ARE NOT SET IN
STONE.
WE HAVE TO SCHEDULE A YEAR IN
ADVANCE SO PEOPLE CAN GET THEM
ON THEIR CALENDARS BUT WE HAVE
TO MOVE DATES AROUND.
THAT&apos;S ALWAYS A POSSIBILITY AS
WELL.
SO RIGHT.
YEAH, JUST YOU KNOW, THE SCHOOL
BOARD MEETINGS JUST I THINK
THERE ARE SOME OF MEETINGS IN
THE SUMMER.
I KNOW THEY DON&apos;T WORK NEARLY
AS REGULARLY THE SUMMER SO
THERE MIGHT BE SOME OPPORTUNITY
FOR ATENCIN OR YOU KNOW, WE
COULD ALSO MAYBE JUST HAVE A
SPECIAL SESSION OR SOMETHING.
YEAH, I&apos;M NOT OF THOSE THREE
PROPOSED TIMES THIS IS
DEFINITELY THE BEST FOR ME
PERSONALLY.
BUT YOU KNOW, I JUST THINKING
IF THIS IS ALL AROUND JUST
TRYING TO GET LIKE A HALF HOUR
PRESENTATION OR MEETING WITH AN
AP REP THEN I DON&apos;T I KNOW IF
I&apos;D WANT TO CHANGE THE WHOLE
SCHEDULE FOR LIKE ONE AGENDA
TOPIC A YEAR BUT YEAH, THAT&apos;S
MY OPINION AND AGAIN, I THINK
THERE ARE REGULAR CONFLICTS BUT
NOT NECESSARILY TWELVE A YEAR.
&gt;&gt; I THINK YEAH.
THE THE FIRST MEETING THAT I
CHAIRED WAS FEBRUARY OF TWENTY
TWENTY AND I DO REMEMBER THE
COMMISSIONER MICKOLUS WAS IN
ATTENDANCE SO IN THE IN THE
BEFORE TIMES WE DID GET AT
LEAST OCCASIONALLY AP
ATTENDANCE I GUESS I&apos;M OK
LEAVING THE SCHEDULE AS IT IS
AND AND LOOKING FOR OTHER WAYS
TO ENGAGE AAPS BUT TO YOUR
POINT I WILL POINT OUT TOPICS
THAT MAYBE AREN&apos;T DIRECTLY
RELATED TO APES LIKE SEVENTH
AND GREENVIEW.
WE TALKED A LOT ABOUT SCHOOLS
WHEN WE WERE TALKING AT SEVENTH
AND I THAT WAS A TIME WHEN I
REALLY WANTED THAT THE SCHOOL&apos;S
OPINION TO BE REPRESENTED SO
BUT THERE MAY BE OTHER WAYS TO
ACHIEVE THAT.
SO I&apos;M OK LOOKING FOR ERIKA HAS
SUGGESTED ANOTHER WAY TO DO THE
RIGHT ALL RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; IN THAT DO HAVE A MOTION TO
RECOMMEND APPROVAL OF THE
TWENTY TWENTY THREE MEETING
SCHEDULE WHICH SETS OUR
COMMISSION MEETINGS ON THIRD
WEDNESDAY OF EVERY MONTH AT
SEVEN P.M. I SAW ONE WOO
SECONDED BY JULIE ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR PHYSICALLY RAISE YOUR
HANDS OR SAY YES YEAH ALL THOSE
OPPOSED.
ANY ABSTENTIONS?
GREAT.
WE HAVE A SCHEDULE FOR NEXT UP
WE&apos;VE GOT THE TRANSIT
PROPULSION STUDY OVERVIEW WITH
MATT CARPENTER.
THANK YOU MADAM CHAIR.
CAN YOU HEAR ME ALL RIGHT?
YEP.
WONDERFUL.
WELL THANK YOU FOR HAVING ME
THIS EVENING.
IT&apos;S WONDERFUL TO SEE MANY
FAMILIAR FACES.
MR. LEE, HOW ARE YOU DOING?
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME.
I&apos;M HERE TODAY TO INTRODUCE A
SUBJECT NEAR AND DEAR TO A LOT
OF PEOPLE&apos;S HEARTS.
IT&apos;S ABOUT CLIMATE ACTION AT
THE PUBLIC TRANSIT AGENCY AND
ASK FOR YOUR HELP.
I HAVE AN ASK FOR YOU
COMMISSIONERS AS WELL ALTHOUGH
I LOVE LOVE COMMISSIONER
BOLEN&apos;S IDEA OF GIVING ALL THE
CITY&apos;S MONEY TO THE TRANSIT
AUTHORITY FROM EARLIER IN THE
MEETING, I UNDERSTAND THAT
MOTION DIDN&apos;T PASS.
&gt;&gt; SO WE&apos;LL WE&apos;LL WE&apos;LL JUST
FORGET THAT ONE WAS DISCUSSED.
BUT I DO HAVE AN ASK FOR YOU.
I ALSO UNDERSTAND WE HAVE ABOUT
TWENTY MINUTES SO I&apos;M GOING TO
TRY TO SPEAK JUST BRIEFLY MAYBE
FOR TEN MINUTES GIVE YOU GUYS
AN OVERVIEW OF THE SUBJECT AND
THEN LEAVE THE NEXT TEN MINUTES
FOR WHATEVER QUESTIONS OR
DISCUSSION WE MAY HAVE.
SO HOPEFULLY YES I SEE I CAN
SHARE MY SCREEN BEFORE I DO SO
A BIG PART OF THE ENVIRONMENT
AND REDUCING OUR
CARBON FOOTPRINT AS OUTLINED IN
THE EIGHT TO ZERO PLAN IS
DECARBONIZING DIFFERENT SECTORS
OF OUR CITY HOUSING FACILITIES,
ENERGY GENERATION AND OF COURSE
THE TRANSPORTATION SECTOR AND
THIS IS NOT AN EASY NUT TO
CRACK BY A LOT OF RESEARCH THAT
WE&apos;VE BEEN DOING KIND
OF SUGGEST TRANSPORTATION MAY
BE ONE OF THE MORE EXPENSIVE
INDUSTRIAL SECTORS TO
DECARBONIZE FOR A VARIETY
OF REASONS.
SO WE&apos;RE INTERESTED IN TRYING
TO GET STARTED BUT IT&apos;S
PROBABLY GOING TO BE A BIT OF A
SLOW ROAD.
WE WANTED TO MAKE SURE WE
UNDERSTOOD THE LATEST STATE
OF TECHNOLOGIES BECAUSE THERE&apos;S
A LOT OF INTERESTING PROPULSION
TECHNOLOGIES OUT THERE.
THE GROUND IS CHANGING VERY
RAPIDLY AS DEMAND INCREASES AND
THINGS ARE EVOLVING.
SO WE HIRED A CONSULTING FIRM
CALLED STAND TECH TWO TO DO A
BIT OF A DESK EXERCISE FOR US
AND BACKGROUND RESEARCH.
WHAT IS THE STATE OF THE
PRACTICE AS IT PERTAINS TO
PUBLIC TRANSIT PROPULSION
TECHNOLOGY?
WE WEREN&apos;T ASKING FOR A
RECOMMENDATION BECAUSE WE KNEW
OUR BOARD NEEDED A LOT MORE
INFORMATION BEFORE WE GOT THERE
BUT WE WANTED THEM TO LAY OUT
WHAT MAIN TECHNOLOGIES WERE THE
PROS AND CONS, THE RISKS AND
BENEFITS AND OF COURSE
IMPORTANTLY THE COSTS AND THE
OPPORTUNITY COSTS.
SO WE BEGAN THAT PROJECT
SEVERAL MONTHS AGO AND WE HAVE
A DRAFT REPORT THAT WE&apos;VE PUT
OUT ON THE STREET AND WE&apos;RE
SEEKING PUBLIC FEEDBACK ON IT
THIS MONTH.
THAT&apos;S MY ASK TO YOU IS NOTHING
ELSE THAN YOUR FEEDBACK THIS
EVENING AND IF YOU WOULD MIND
HELP US GET THE WORD OUT AND
LET PEOPLE KNOW THAT THIS
OPPORTUNITY TO SHARE THEIR
FEEDBACK EXISTS AND WE&apos;D LOVE
TO HEAR FROM THEM MAYBE OVER
THE NEXT WEEK OR TWO SO WE CAN
BEGIN TO FINISH UP THE REPORTS.
BUT THAT WILL ONLY BE THE
BEGINNING OF THE PROCESS.
WE PROBABLY HAVE SEVERAL MONTHS
TO GO BEFORE WE REACH ANY SORT
OF DECISION.
SO THIS EARLY POINT IS JUST
ABOUT HAVE TO LOOK AT THE
RESEARCH AND TELL US WHAT YOU
THINK.
SO I&apos;M GOING TO SHARE MY SCREEN
NOW WALK YOU THROUGH JUST A
COUPLE OF THINGS SO YOU SHOULD
BE SEEING A PART OF OUR WEBSITE
NOW.
YEAH, THUMBS UP ALL SO WE HAVE
ON OUR WEBSITE A PAGE DEDICATED
TO THIS PROJECT ALTERNATIVE
PROPULSION STUDY IF YOU WERE TO
VISIT HERE AND IN THE FUTURE
YOU&apos;LL FIND A LOT OF GOOD
INFORMATION.
THE FINAL REPORT ITSELF ALL TWO
SOMETHING PAGES IS RIGHT THERE.
I UNDERSTAND YOU MAY HAVE
RECEIVED THAT AS PART OF THE
PACKAGE FOR THIS EVENING.
I HOPE EVERYONE READ THE WHOLE
THING.
IF NOT YOU CAN READ JUST THE
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY.
YOU CAN EVEN WATCH A VIDEO
ABOUT THE EXECUTIVE SUMMARY TO
SAVE YOURSELF A LITTLE MORE
TIME ADDITIONAL RESOURCES.
WE FOUND A LOT OF GREAT VIDEOS
ONLINE SORT OF TALK ABOUT
VARIOUS ELEMENTS OF THIS
DECISION OF DIFFERENT
TECHNOLOGIES, SOME OF THE
CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
THAT THEY REPRESENT.
WE&apos;VE DONE SOME MEETINGS.
UNFORTUNATELY THEY WERE ALL
YESTERDAY.
SO THAT SHIP IS SORT OF A SALE
AND WE HAVE AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PUBLIC COMMENT.
SO IF YOU WANT TO GIVE US YOUR
FEEDBACK VIA THIS WEB FORM,
THAT&apos;S A GREAT WAY SO THAT WE
CAN KEEP TRACK OF THE COMMENTS.
SO I&apos;M JUST GOING TO TOUCH ON A
COUPLE OF HIGH LEVEL POINTS
COMING FROM THE STUDY WHICH HAS
REALLY BEEN A LOT OF FUN FOR ME
.
I&apos;VE REALLY GEEK OUT ON THIS.
I GOT TO GET IN TOUCH WITH MY
INNER MECHANICAL ENGINEER AND
LEARN A LOT ABOUT THE VARIOUS
ISSUES GOING ON HERE.
IT&apos;S BEEN A REAL EDUCATION SO
VERY QUICKLY WE SORT OF LOOKED
AT A VARIETY OF THINGS AND
QUICKLY FOCUSED DOWN INTO TWO
MAIN TECHNOLOGIES THAT ARE
GROWING FAIRLY RAPIDLY IN OUR
INDUSTRY BATTERY ELECTRIC
BUSSES AND HYDROGEN FUEL CELL
ELECTRIC BUSSES.
SO VERY QUICKLY A BATTERY
ELECTRIC BUS IS THE TESLA
OF BUSSES.
IT&apos;S PROMOTION ELECTRIC
TRACTION MOTORS IN THE AXLE&apos;S
RUN BY VERY BIG BATTERIES WHERE
THEY STORE THE ENERGY FUELING
OCCURS FROM RECHARGING STATIONS
.
IT CAN COME IN A VARIETY
OF SHAPES AND SIZES HYDROGEN
FUEL CELL ELECTRIC BUSSES ARE
ANOTHER TECHNOLOGY IS VERY
RELATED, VERY SIMILAR.
THEY ARE ALSO ELECTRIC BUSSES.
THEY HAVE ELECTRIC TRACTION
MOTORS.
THE DIFFERENCE IS THEY STORE
THE ENERGY ON BOARD IN A
DIFFERENT FORMAT AND COMPRESSED
HYDROGEN GAS OR LIQUEFIED
HYDROGEN GAS.
THE HYDROGEN THROUGH
ELECTROLYSIS IS CONVERTED INTO
ELECTRIC CHARGE.
THE CHARGE IS A SMALL BATTERY
CONTINUOUSLY AND THAT BATTERY
RUNS THE ELECTRIC TRACTION
MOTORS.
THE REFUELING IS A VERY
DIFFERENT THING MUCH MORE AKIN
TO THE REFUELING OF OUR DIESEL
BUSSES FROM A FILLING STATION
IN OUR GARAGE LIKE IT&apos;S DONE
TODAY.
&gt;&gt; SO THIS IS JUST A SHOT
OF SOME OF THE THE SUPPLY
CHAINS FOR WHAT A BATTERY
ELECTRIC BUS LOOKS LIKE.
OF COURSE IT&apos;S HOOKED UP TO THE
ELECTRICAL GRID AND THE
CHARGING NOT I DON&apos;T KNOW IF
YOU&apos;RE SHOWING US THE SLIDES OR
IMAGES RIGHT NOW BUT WE&apos;RE NOT
SEEING THEM.
YOU&apos;RE NOT WE&apos;RE STILL SEEING
THE COMMENTS THE THE BROWSER
WINDOW.
&gt;&gt; OH, DEAR.
ALL RIGHT.
LET ME SEE WHAT I CAN DO ABOUT
THAT.
LET&apos;S TRY AGAIN.
HOW&apos;S THAT THERE?
ALL RIGHT.
OK, THANK YOU.
SO THIS SLIDE WITH ITS PICTURES
AND IMAGES SHOW A BIT ABOUT HOW
THE ELECTRICITY GETS TO CHARGE
THE BUS AND YOU CAN SEE THE
PICTURE ON THE LOWER RIGHT HAND
SIDE.
ONE WAY OF DOING IT THE RED
DEVICES ATTACHED TO THE ROOF
ARE OVERHEAD CANTERBURY
POWERING APPARATUS THEY LOWER
INTO PLACE TO TOUCH THE
CHARGING BATTERY STUDS ON THE
TOP OF THE BUSSES.
MORE CONVENTIONAL WAY IS JUST
WITH BIG WIRES THAT THE CEILING
AND JUST PLUG IT IN LIKE A
TESTINO.
I&apos;VE CHANGED THE SLIDE.
DID IT CHANGE?
WONDERFUL.
SOME OF THE PROS OF THE BATTERY
ELECTRIC BUSTED AND
COVERED SLIGHTLY CHEAPER THAN
THE HYDROGEN BUSSES.
BOTH OF BATTERY AND HYDROGEN
BUSSES ARE CONSIDERABLY MORE
EXPENSIVE THAN THE DIESELS.
LOWER MAINTENANCE COSTS AND THE
BATTERY RANGES ARE EXPECTED TO
IMPROVE.
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF TECHNOLOGICAL
ADVANCEMENT GOING ON IN THE
SPACE AND ARGUABLY LOWER FUEL
COSTS.
THE BIG DOWNSIDE WITH THE
BATTERY BUSSES IS RANGE AND
RANGE ANXIETY A BIG DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN A PASSENGER CAR LIKE A
TESLA AND A BUS HAS TO DO WITH
WHAT WE CALL THE DUTY CYCLE.
PERSONAL CAR IS A LIGHT DUTY
VEHICLE.
MAYBE IT RUNS THIRTY FORTY FIVE
MINUTES IN THE MORNING.
IT&apos;S PLUGGED IN FOR A FEW HOURS
.
YOU TAKE IT OUT, GO TO LUNCH,
PLUG IT BACK IN, GO HOME.
MAYBE THERE&apos;S A ROAD TRIP IN
THERE ONCE IN A WHILE A HEAVY
DUTY TRANSIT BUS BY COMPARISON
CAN BE IN CONTINUOUS OPERATION
FOR SIXTEEN STRAIGHT HOURS A
DAY.
THEY CAN LEAVE THE GARAGE AT
6AM AND COME BACK UNTIL ONE
A.M. IN THE WINTER.
THEY NEED TO KEEP THIS VERY
LARGE PASSENGER COMPARTMENT AND
THE DOOR KEEPS OPENING AND
SHUTTING.
THAT CREATES A VERY STRONG DRAW
ON THE ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS IF
THAT&apos;S WHAT YOU&apos;RE USING.
SO THE BATTERY ELECTRIC BUSSES
WHERE THEY ARE RIGHT NOW IS
THEY CERTAINLY WORK THE BUS
ROLLS BUT THEY CAN&apos;T DEPLOY
FULLY TO MEET THE SCALE AND
RANGE THAT DIESEL HISTORICALLY
CAN DO WITH NO PROBLEM.
SO WE&apos;VE DISCOVERED THAT ONLY
ABOUT TWO THIRDS OF OUR ROUTES
COULD ACTUALLY BE COVERED ON A
DAILY BASIS BEFORE THE
BATTERIES JUST RUN OUT.
SO THAT PRESENTS A LOGICAL
PROBLEM DIFFICULTY IN SCALING
THIS PARTICULAR TECHNOLOGY THAT
MAY OR MAY NOT BE WORKED OUT
OVER THE COMING YEARS.
I THINK THAT&apos;S THE BIGGEST
ISSUE WE UNCOVERED WITH THE
BATTERY.
THERE ARE A NUMBER OF OTHER
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS AS WELL.
MOVING ON TO THE NEXT SLIDE I
HOPE EVERYONE SEES A SLIDE
ABOUT HYDROGEN BUSSES SORT
NODDING THERE SO THAT FUEL
SUPPLY CHAIN HERE IS QUITE A
BIT DIFFERENT.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S OBVIOUSLY DELIVERED
MORE LIKE DIESEL AND A TANKER
TRUCK FILLED UP IN A LARGE TANK
.
THAT TANK GOES THROUGH A NUMBER
OF MECHANICAL PROCESSES BEFORE
IT CAN USE TO FUEL THE BUS.
BUT THE FEELING IS VERY
CONVENTIONAL FOR US, VERY
FAMILIAR TO WHAT WE WOULD DO
WITH A GAS POWERED CAR OR A
DIESEL BUS PROSE MUCH LONGER
RANGE.
THESE THINGS CAN COVER 90 OR
MORE PERCENT OF OUR ROUTES EVEN
IN THE COLD MINIMAL CHANGES TO
OUR SERVICING AND FUELING
PRACTICES WHICH IS AN IMPORTANT
PART OF OUR INTERNAL
EFFICIENCIES AGAIN LOWER
MAINTENANCE COSTS THAN DIESEL
MAYBE A BIT MORE EXPENSIVE
ELECTRIC AND POSSIBLY MORE COST
EFFECTIVE AT SCALE.
ONE OF THE THINGS IS NO MATTER
HOW MANY MORE HYDROGEN BUSSES
YOU BUY, YOU STILL JUST HAVE
THE ONE HYDROGEN FILLING
STATION FOR EVERY ELECTRIC BUS
YOU BUY YOU HAVE TO HAVE A
CHARGER.
SO THE OVERHEAD LITERALLY
OVERHEAD COSTS GROW QUICKLY
WITH BATTERY BUSSES OF DOWNSIDE
.
IT&apos;S OBVIOUSLY A LOT OF SPACE
REQUIRED FOR THAT HYDROGEN
FUELING STATION MUCH BIGGER
UPFRONT COSTS TO BUILD THAT
STATION VEHICLES ARE A BIT MORE
EXPENSIVE RIGHT NOW.
A LOT OF UPGRADES AND EXPENSIVE
FUEL COMING FORWARD.
WE DID A LOT OF FINANCIAL
MODELING.
I&apos;M NOT GOING TO GO INTO
EXCRUCIATING DETAIL ABOUT THAT
RIGHT NOW, ALTHOUGH I&apos;M SURE
YOU WOULD ALL LOVE TO HEAR ME
GO INTO EXCRUCIATING DETAIL
ABOUT THE FINANCES.
I&apos;M GOING TO ACTUALLY SKIP UP
TO SOME OF THE HIGH LEVEL
THINGS, THE BENEFITS
OF POSSIBLY CONVERTING OUR
FLEET IN THE FUTURE.
WE COULD SAVE SEVERAL THOUSAND
TO TEN THOUSAND TONS
OF GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS A
YEAR FROM THIS PROCESS.
THIS IS NOT BAD.
NOT BAD.
IT&apos;S ALSO NOT THAT BIG WHEN WE
LOOK AT IT, IT REPRESENTS ABOUT
A HALF OF A PERCENT OF ALL THE
CARBON EMISSIONS IN THE
COMMUNITY.
SO WHEN WE TALKED ABOUT
DECARBONIZING THE
TRANSPORTATION SECTOR, THIS IS
PART OF THE CHALLENGE.
&gt;&gt; BUSSES ARE ALREADY PRETTY
EFFICIENT IN THE EMISSIONS
SITUATION.
SO GETTING THIS LAST LITTLE BIT
OF EMISSIONS OUT OF THE SYSTEM
WILL BE AN EXPENSIVE
UNDERTAKING.
WE NEED TO GRAPPLE WITH THAT
WOULD PROBABLY NEED TO BE
PHASED IN OVER A NUMBER
OF YEARS.
BUSSES LAST TWELVE YEARS SO
THIS MAY BE 12 TO 20 YEAR
PROCESS.
&gt;&gt; THERE ARE POTENTIAL COST
SAVINGS OVER DIESEL.
PARTICULARLY INTERESTING IS THE
MAINTENANCE COST SAVINGS.
WE&apos;VE HAD SEVERAL OF THESE
BUSSES VISIT THE GARAGE AND
OBVIOUSLY A MUCH SIMPLER
MECHANICAL DEVICE TO SERVICE AS
WELL.
COSTS COSTS ARE SIGNIFICANT AS
WE SAID WE&apos;RE ESTIMATING
POSSIBLY UP TO SEVENTY FIVE
MILLION ADDITIONAL DOLLARS OVER
THE NEXT TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
YEARS TO PURCHASE AND IMPLEMENT
THESE THINGS.
IT&apos;S A PREMIUM.
THE VEHICLES THEMSELVES COST
ANYWHERE FROM 50 ONE HUNDRED
PERCENT MORE THAN A DIESEL BUS
DOES THE THE CHARGING
STRUCTURES AND FUELING
STRUCTURES ARE ALSO QUITE
EXPENSIVE.
HOWEVER, THERE&apos;S SOME PRETTY
GOOD COMPETITIVE GRANTS OUT
THERE RIGHT NOW FROM THE
FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
WE HOPE THAT THOSE CONTINUE
GOING FORWARD THAT COULD PAY
FOR FRANKLY A GOOD CHUNK
OF THAT.
SO WE&apos;RE ANGLING TOWARDS A
GRANT SUBMISSION TO THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT THAT WOULD PAY THE
BULK OF THE CAPITAL COSTS FOR
DOING THIS.
THIS DOES LEAD US LEAVE US
EXPOSED TO THE RISK
OF OPERATING COSTS WHICH
PRIMARILY COME FROM A RANGE
ISSUES WITH THE BATTERY BUSSES
AND THE FUEL COSTS THEMSELVES.
ELECTRICAL RATES ARE COMPLEX
THINGS TO MODEL AND USE SCALE
AND THE HYDROGEN FUEL SUPPLY IS
PRETTY UNDERDEVELOPED AT THIS
POINT.
SO HOPEFULLY THOSE THINGS WILL
BEGIN TO CHANGE.
SO MADAM CHAIR, WITH THAT I
WILL STOP STARING MY SCREEN AND
HAPPY TO LOVED HEARING
QUESTIONS YOUR THOUGHTS YOU
GUYS HAVE AND AGAIN MY ASK US
TO JUST HELP US RAISE AWARENESS
THAT THIS REPORT IS OUT THERE.
WE&apos;D LOVE TO GET PEOPLE&apos;S
FEEDBACK AND JUST DRIVE PEOPLE
TO OUR WEBSITE.
THAT&apos;S WHERE ALL THE
INFORMATION IS BUT HAPPY TO
ANSWER ANY QUESTIONS YOU MAY.
GREAT, THANKS.
I&apos;LL JUST TAKE YOUR QUESTIONS
BACK RIGHT OR DO THE CURRENT
HYBRID BUSSES FIT IN TERMS
OF GREENHOUSE GAS REDUCTION IN
COST AND IN OTHERS THEY&apos;RE
SLIGHTLY MORE FUEL EFFICIENT
THAN THE LATEST MODEL OF DIESEL
BUSSES BUT THEY COST ABOUT 50
PERCENT MORE.
SO THAT DIRECTION THE COST
BENEFIT THING THERE, IT HASN&apos;T
PANNED OUT WHAT HAPPENED AND I
WOULD SAY TEN, FIFTEEN YEARS
AGO HYBRIDS MAYBE WERE THE BEST
OPTION AND DIESEL BUSSES
OF THAT ERA WERE MUCH MORE
POLLUTING THAN WE HAD EPA
REGULATIONS COME IN IN TWENTY
TEN THAT FUNDAMENTALLY CHANGED
HEAVY DUTY BUS ENGINES THERE
BURN MUCH CLEANER NOW THAN THEY
DID BACK THEN.
SO THEY BECAME SO DIESEL BECAME
CLEANER AND CLEANER AND THE
COSTS STAYED LOW THE HIGHER THE
HYBRIDS STAYED EXPENSIVE AND
JUST THEIR PERFORMANCE DIDN&apos;T
IMPROVE.
THEY ALSO ARE MECHANICALLY MORE
COMPLEX BECAUSE YOU HAVE TO
PROPULSION SYSTEMS AND NOT JUST
ONE SO TWICE AS MANY THINGS TO
BREAK PETE
, THANKS FOR THE
REPORT.
I HAVE A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS
THOUGH ABOUT THE ASSUMPTIONS
THAT WERE USED FOR CALCULATING
CO2 EMISSIONS AND I GUESS WHAT
I UNDERSTAND FROM THE REPORT IS
THAT WE&apos;RE CALCULATE THE CO2
EMISSIONS OF OF BATTERY
ELECTRIC VEHICLES BASED ON
BUYING GREEN POWER FROM BETTY
AND I GUESS I DON&apos;T IT&apos;S NOT
CLEAR TO ME HOW BY HOW
PARTICIPATING IN GREEN POWER
PROGRAM LESSENS
THE
CARBON OUTPUT OF THE
ELECTRICITY THAT WE WOULD BUY
FOR THE CARBON IMPACT OF THE
ELECTRICITY GRID THAT WE WOULD
BUY AND I CAN&apos;T FIND ANY
DETAILS FROM DTV ABOUT WELL
WHAT THEY DO WITH THE EXTRA
MONEY THAT YOU PAY FOR BUYING
GREEN ENERGY.
SO I WOULD PERSONALLY PREFER TO
SEE THE THE CARBON IMPACT
OF ALTERNATIVES LIKE THE
BATTERY ELECTRIC BUSSES BE
CALCULATED WITH DTD, THE MIX,
THE ACTUAL MIX OF GREEN AND
FOSSIL FUELS THAT THEY USE AND
I UNDERSTAND FROM THE REPORT
THAT THAT&apos;S 15 PERCENT RIGHT
NOW.
I THINK IT&apos;S MANDATED TO
INCREASE BUT I WOULD LIKE TO
KNOW WHAT WHAT THE CO2 OUTPUT
FOR THE BATTERY VEHICLES WOULD
BE BASED ON THE ACTUAL MIX.
WHAT I WANT TO MAKE SURE IS
THAT BATTERY VEHICLES DON&apos;T END
UP CREATING MORE CARBON OUTPUT
WITH ELECTRICITY THAT THEY USE
AND THAT&apos;S NOT CLEAR FROM THE
INFORMATION IT&apos;S IN THERE NOW
THE OTHER THING THAT I NOTICED
WAS THAT THE ASSUMPTIONS FOR
THE FINANCIAL AND AND EMISSIONS
MODELING DON&apos;T INCLUDE AN
ASSUMPTION FOR
BATTERY ELECTRIC
VEHICLES.
HOW MANY MILES CAN THEY GO IN A
SINGLE KILOWATT HOUR?
&gt;&gt; THAT TO ME SEEMS LIKE A
REALLY CRITICAL PIECE
OF INFORMATION FOR FIGURING OUT
HOW MUCH CO2 OUTPUT THERE WOULD
BE BATTERY ELECTRIC VEHICLES
AND BEING ABLE TO COMPARE THAT
TO WHAT A DIESEL VEHICLE WOULD
BECAUSE WE KNOW THE DENHA MILES
PER GALLON PERFORMANCE OF A
DIESEL VEHICLE THAT IS IN THE
REPORT.
SO THOSE ARE MY OBSERVATIONS
AND SLIGHTLY MORE ANALYSIS THAT
I WOULD LIKE TO SEE SO THAT WE
CAN MAKE SURE WE&apos;RE REALLY
PUTTING THE INCREASED CAPITAL
EXPENDITURE IN PLACE THAT GETS
US THE MOST BANG FOR THE BUCK
IN TERMS OF REDUCING CO2 OUTPUT
.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT, BRETT TIPPINS,
LAST QUESTION.
THERE&apos;S SOME DISCUSSION ON
SEVENTY EIGHT SEVENTY NINE
EIGHTY OF THE FULL REPORT ON
THE TABLE IS FOR KILOWATT HOURS
PER MILE FOR A FEW DIFFERENT
BUS MODELS.
SO THERE IS SOME DISCUSSION
THERE IN THE KILOWATT HOUR PER
MILE UNIT DOMAIN AND ALSO ON
THE I COMMEND THE PEOPLE WHO DO
THIS STUDY FOR CONSIDERING
WHETHER THE CODE WHETHER IT&apos;S
YOU KNOW, IT&apos;S IT&apos;S A
COMPLETELY NEW CONSIDERATION
THAT CAN CONVENTIONAL BUSSES
DON&apos;T HAVE TO THINK ABOUT BUT
CAN BE OF MORE AND MORE THAN 50
PERCENT REDUCTION IN RANGE
MAYBE 60 OR SIXTY FIVE PERCENT
REDUCTION RANGE.
SO THAT&apos;S REALLY, REALLY
SIGNIFICANT AND HARD TO
OVERCOME FOR THE BATTERY
ELECTRIC BUSSES.
I HAVE A QUESTION THOUGH ABOUT
WITH THE CONSIDERABLE CAPITAL
COST YOU KNOW THE INCREMENTAL
COST OF DIESEL BUSSES IS THE
PROPOSED FUNDING OR GRANTS
AVAILABLE GRANTS SEEMS LIKE THE
COUNTRY IS KIND OF FLUSH WITH
RIGHT NOW.
ARE THEY DEPENDENT ON HAVING A
PLAN, A PURCHASE ORDER OR
SOMETHING THAT YOU HAVE TO
DECIDE RIGHT NOW OR CAN WE JUST
LIKE TRY TO START GOING AFTER
MONEY AFTER THESE GRANTS WHILE
THEY&apos;RE AVAILABLE?
I DON&apos;T KNOW.
IT JUST SEEMS LIKE A LITTLE BIT
CART BEFORE THE HORSE.
IT&apos;S A GREAT STUDY AND I THINK
IT&apos;S IT WILL BE AND HOPEFULLY
IT WILL BE NEEDED.
BUT IT SEEMS LIKE IF WE CAN&apos;T
GET A HUGE AMOUNT OF GRANT
MONEY LIKE THIS IS KIND OF A
MOOT POINT.
THANK YOU.
I THINK PUTTING BEFORE WE JUMP
IS NEVER A MOOT EXERCISE BUT I
TAKE YOUR POINT ABOUT ADMIRING
THE PROBLEM FOR TOO LONG THAT
THE OPPORTUNITY PASSES AND I
THINK THAT IS A VERY LEGITIMATE
POINT TO YOUR QUESTION.
YES, ACTUALLY THE FEDS DO
REQUIRE US TO HAVE A VERY
SPECIFIC TYPE OF PLAN THAT
REPRESENTS OUR COMMITMENT TO
MOVE TOWARDS SOME TYPE OF THE
ZERO EMISSIONS TECHNOLOGY IN
ORDER TO QUALIFY FOR THE
GRANTS.
SO WE DO HAVE TO DEMONSTRATE
THAT WE THAT WE&apos;RE SERIOUS.
ALSO KEEP IN MIND FROM OUR
POINT OF VIEW THEY DON&apos;T WANT
TO SHOVEL MONEY INTO ANN ARBOR
AND THEN FIND THAT WE&apos;RE A
BUNCH OF JOKERS WHO REALLY
NEVER HAD A PLAN TO BEGIN WITH
AND 10 YEARS FROM NOW WE STILL
HAVEN&apos;T SPENT THE MONEY THAT
MAKES THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT A
LITTLE UPSET AND THEN THEY
DON&apos;T GIVE YOU ANY MORE MONEY
SO THEY WILL WANT US TO EXECUTE
AND HAVING DONE WORK LIKE THIS
INCREASES THEIR CONFIDENCE IN
AGENCIES LIKE OURS THAT WE&apos;RE
NOT JOKERS, THAT WE KNOW WHAT
WE&apos;RE DOING.
WE LOOKED THIS GIVEN IN OUR DUE
DILIGENCE AND WE&apos;RE SERIOUS SO
WE ARE STRUGGLING WITH HOW TO
HIT THE TIMELINES.
I AM OPTIMISTIC BECAUSE
OF RECENT ELECTED ELECTION
RESULTS THAT MAYBE THERE WILL
CONTINUE TO BE POLITICAL WILL
IN THIS DIRECTION FOR THE
FORESEEABLE FUTURE.
ONE OF THE THINGS WE&apos;RE ALSO
THINKING ABOUT IN THIS KIND
OF BLOWS MY IS THERE COULD BE A
FUTURE OUT THERE WHERE GETTING
PARTS FOR A DIESEL BUS IS KIND
FINDING PARTS FOR A FIFTY EIGHT
PACKARD.
IT&apos;S JUST YOU GOT TO GO ON
EBAY.
YOU CAN&apos;T DO IT LIKE THE
TECHNOLOGY IS MOVING AND WE
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT WE DON&apos;T
GET LEFT BEHIND COMPLETELY.
BUT DOING THIS WORK I THINK IS
AN IMPORTANT STEP THAT WILL
SERVE US WELL DOWN THE ROAD.
ERICA FOLKSIER JUST MIGHT BE
INTERESTED TO KNOW THE ENERGY
MISSION YOU GO AND SEARCH.
LET&apos;S START THERE FOR OR ON THE
CITY&apos;S WEBSITE FOR THE
SUSTAINABLE ENERGY UTILITY.
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF INFORMATION
ABOUT KIND OF THIS FEASIBILITY
STUDY THAT&apos;S UNDERWAY RIGHT NOW
TO TO LOOK AT HOW WE&apos;RE GOING
TO POWER OURSELVES IN THE
FUTURE.
AND SO I THINK MAYBE THAT COMES
INTO PLAY AS WELL IN TERMS
OF WHAT OUR FUTURE SOURCES
OF ENERGY MIGHT.
OBVIOUSLY WE&apos;RE A LONG WAY FROM
UNDERSTANDING WHAT THAT MIGHT
BE AT THIS POINT.
BUT THERE&apos;S SOME GOOD
INTERESTING PRESENTATIONS.
ALSO THE LAST PRESENTATION AND
ENERGY COMMISSION INVOLVED
PRESENTATION BY MY GREENPOWER
PROGRAM.
JUST I I&apos;M CURIOUS IN TERMS
OF TECHNOLOGY CHANGES AND I
HAVE NOT READ THE REPORT YET SO
I WILL I WILL DO THAT AND SO IT
MAY TOUCH ON THIS BUT WITH
CHANGING TECHNOLOGY I THAT
ELECTRIC VEHICLES I MEAN THIS
IS WHERE THE FUTURE IS FOR THE
INDUSTRY.
IS THERE A SENSE THAT
ESPECIALLY ON THE RANGE ISSUES
THAT IT MIGHT BE A LOT MORE
BENEFICIAL TO BE, YOU KNOW,
ENTERING INTO THE MARKET IN
FIVE YEARS OR IS THERE ANY
SENSE AROUND WHAT&apos;S COMING
THAT&apos;S NOT QUITE HERE YET OR OH
YES.
ONE OF THE THINGS THE REPORT I
THINK DOES QUITE WELL IS SORT
OF ACKNOWLEDGES THE EARLY STAGE
OF THE LEARNING CURVE THE
INDUSTRY IS IN.
WE&apos;VE BEEN USING DIESEL BUSSES
FOR ONE HUNDRED YEARS.
THEY&apos;RE VERY MATURE TECHNOLOGY
.
COMPRESSED NATURAL GAS IS A
VERY MATURE TECHNOLOGY WHEN YOU
DO A COST ESTIMATE FOR THOSE
TECHNOLOGIES YOU CAN HIT IT
PRETTY SPOT ON THE OLDEST
HYDROGEN FOR US IS ABOUT TWENTY
YEARS OLD.
THE OLDEST BATTERY ELECTRIC BUS
IS EIGHT SO THEY HAVEN&apos;T EVEN
MADE IT THROUGH A FULL
LIFECYCLE YET SO WE DON&apos;T EVEN
KNOW WHAT THE LIFE CYCLE COST
FOR SOME OF THEM ARE.
SO THERE IS A GREAT DEAL
OF RISK ON ALL OF THESE
TECHNOLOGIES AND IN PART
BECAUSE THEY ARE EVOLVING
QUICKLY.
THERE&apos;S A LOT OF HOPE THAT
TECHNOLOGY AND TECHNOLOGICAL
FIXES ARE GOING TO RESOLVE SOME
OF THE ISSUES.
BUT THERE&apos;S ALSO WHAT I CALL
THE VCR BETAMAX POSSIBILITY
THAT WE&apos;VE GOT THESE TWO
TECHNOLOGY RIGHT NOW.
ONE OF THEM MIGHT NOT BE AROUND
IN A FEW YEARS.
IT MAY FALL BY THE WAYSIDE AND
NO LONGER BE A PRACTICAL
CONSIDERATION AND RIGHT NOW WE
CAN&apos;T REALLY CLEARLY TELL WHICH
ONE OF THESE THINGS IT IS.
THE BATTERY BUSSES ARE VERY
POPULAR FRANKLY FOR PUBLIC
RELATIONS PURPOSES BECAUSE
THEY&apos;RE QUICK AND EASY AND THEY
WILL AT LEAST GO AS FAR AS THE
TV CAMERAS.
BUT IN PRACTICE WE&apos;RE FINDING
THAT THEY&apos;RE NOT USED AS MUCH
AS YOU MIGHT EXPECT WHEREAS THE
HYDROGEN GROUP IS GETTING A LOT
MORE INTEREST RECENTLY BECAUSE
OF THE RANGE ISSUE.
BUT THERE&apos;S A LOT OF CAUTIOUS
OPTIMISM THAT BREAKTHROUGHS IN
BATTERY TECHNOLOGY MIGHT
ELIMINATE THAT PROBLEM IN
BATTERIES MIGHT BECOME A VERY
SUREFIRE WAY OF DOING IT.
ONE OF THE THINGS WE&apos;VE
ENCOUNTERED HOWEVER I DON&apos;T
KNOW IF ANY OF YOU ARE AWARE
WHAT IT TAKES TO GET THE
MINERALS NECESSARY TO BUILD
BATTERIES AT THIS SCALE.
THE MINING OPERATIONS FOR
COBALT NICKEL AND OTHER EARTH
ELEMENTS THAT GO INTO BATTERIES
IT&apos;S IT&apos;S PRETTY DIRTY AND IT&apos;S
DONE IN A LOT OF PARTS OF THE
GLOBE WHERE ENVIRONMENTAL
REGULATIONS AND SAFETY
REGULATIONS AND CHILD LABOR
LAWS ARE SOMEWHAT MORE LAX THAN
WE&apos;RE USED TO HERE.
SO THEY&apos;RE IMPLICATED IN PRETTY
MUCH IN EVERY DIRECTION ON
THIS.
THERE IS NO
MAGIC BULLET.
THERE IS NO EASY SOLUTION
WAITING FIVE YEARS IS A VERY
REAL POSSIBILITY.
WE WOULD KNOW A WHOLE LOT MORE
FIVE YEARS FROM NOW THAN WE DO
TODAY BUT I&apos;M NOT SURE WE WANT
TO WAIT.
I&apos;M NOT SURE THE COMMUNITY
WANTS TO WAIT.
SO FINDING A WAY TO MAKE
PROGRESS, EVEN SMALL PROGRESS
IS IS KIND OF WHAT WE&apos;RE
LOOKING FOR AT THE MOMENT.
WE WANT TO AT LEAST GET
STARTED.
THANKS.
THE OTHER THING THAT I DIDN&apos;T
SEE FACTORED INTO THAT PRO CON
LIST WAS YOU MENTIONED SORT
OF THE IMPACT ON MAINTENANCE
WHICH ALSO OBVIOUSLY THERE&apos;S A
MAINTENANCE STAFF AND SO
THINKING ABOUT THE IMPACT ON ON
LABOR, I THINK IT&apos;S IMPORTANT
AS WELL AND THANKS FOR BRINGING
THAT UP.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT
SOMETIMES IS FORGOTTEN BEFORE
WE WENT PUBLIC WITH THIS WE HAD
TWO OR THREE EXTENSIVE
CONVERSATIONS WITH OUR 30
PERSON MECHANICS STAFF GREAT
GUYS AND GIRLS WHO&apos;VE BEEN
FIXING HEAVY DUTY DIESEL BUSSES
FOR A LONG TIME AND IT I WAS
CONCERNED THEY MIGHT FIND A
TECHNOLOGY LIKE THIS THAT
THREATENING I WAS REALLY
IMPRESSED.
THEY ALREADY KIND OF KNEW A
GREAT DEAL OF IT THEMSELVES AND
THEY VERY ENTHUSIASTICALLY
ENGAGED WITH THE MANAGEMENT IN
TERMS OF LET&apos;S LEARN MORE.
SOME OF THEM ARE RELATIVELY
YOUNG AND THEY SEE THIS AS A
GROWTH OPPORTUNITY TO EXPAND
THEIR SKILLS AND DO SOMETHING.
SO I&apos;M CAUTIOUSLY OPTIMISTIC ON
THAT POINT.
THE GRANTS ALL REQUIRE THE
FEDERAL GRANTS ALL REQUIRE A
LOT OF STAFF INVESTMENT AND
STAFF TRAINING AND RETRAINING.
SO WE&apos;RE VERY OPTIMISTIC IN
THAT AREA.
THE MECHANICS ARE HARD TO FIND
SO WE DEFINITELY WANT TO KEEP
ALL OF THEM THAT WE HAVE THE
PHASE IN IS ALSO AN ISSUE.
THE BUSSES LAST FOR 12 YEARS,
11 YEARS AFTER WE START WE&apos;LL
STILL HAVE DIESEL BUSSES AROUND
SO WE&apos;LL STILL NEED TO BE
MAINTAINED.
GOOD QUESTIONS.
A GOOD REMINDER.
&gt;&gt; GREAT.
I&apos;M NOT SEEING ANY OTHER
QUESTIONS SO THANKS SO MUCH FOR
THE PRESENTATION.
&gt;&gt; SOUNDS LIKE FOLKS HAVE A
COUPLE OF WEEKS TO GET YOU
ADDITIONAL FEEDBACK.
IS THAT RIGHT?
YEAH, I&apos;D LOVE TO HAVE IT
UNFORTUNATELY I THINK NOVEMBER
TWENTY EIGHT IS OUR DEADLINE SO
A WEEK AFTER A WEEK OR SO FROM
MONDAY ALL THE INFORMATION&apos;S ON
THE WEBSITE.
YOU DON&apos;T HAVE TO READ THE
WHOLE REPORT.
YOU CAN JUST READ THE EXECUTIVE
SUMMARIES AND WATCH THE VIDEOS
AND I THINK WILL GIVE YOU
ENOUGH TO GIVE US SOME INITIAL
THOUGHTS.
&gt;&gt; GREAT.
&gt;&gt; THANKS SO MUCH.
THANK YOU ALL.
HAVE A GREAT ALL RIGHT.
MOVING ON TO THE CRASH REPORT
WITH CYNTHIA RENNINGER.
&gt;&gt; GOOD EVENING.
I THANK YOU TO CHAIR ALL THE
COMMISSIONERS FOR HAVING ME
THIS EVENING TO DISCUSS CRASH
REPORTING IN ANN ARBOR TONIGHT
.
I SPECIFICALLY WOULD LIKE TO
DISCUSS WITH YOU HOW WE USE OUR
CRASH DATA, WHAT THE SOURCES
OF OUR CRASH DATA ARE AND HOW
ANYONE IN THE COMMUNITY IS NOW
GOING TO BE ABLE TO ACCESS OUR
CRASH REPORTING AND THEN LEAVE
SOME TIME FOR DISCUSSION AND
QUESTIONS AT THE END.
&gt;&gt; I HAVE IT MYSELF THOUGH SO
HOPEFULLY I DON&apos;T GET OFF ON
THAT ONE.
&gt;&gt; FIRST OF ALL, JUST TO TOUCH
ON HOW WE USE OUR CRASH DATA,
WE USE OUR CRASH DATA FOR DATA
DRIVEN DECISION MAKING WHICH IS
REALLY WHEN WE&apos;RE SETTING OUR
PRIORITIES AND WE&apos;RE
DETERMINING THOSE SYSTEMIC
COUNTERMEASURES TO FOCUS ON
SUCH AS THE ACTIVITIES THAT
WE&apos;RE DONE WITH OUR
TRANSPORTATION PLAN A MOVING
TOGETHER AND THEN WE DO PROJECT
SPECIFIC ANALYSIS THAT HELPS US
MOLD AND DETERMINE THE TYPES
OF ELEMENTS WE NEED IN A
SPECIFIC PROJECT AND THEN ALSO
MONITORING CHANGE OVER TIME.
AND THAT&apos;S REALLY WHAT WE&apos;VE
BEEN DOING WITH THE STATIC
CRASH REPORT THAT WE&apos;VE BEEN
PRODUCING OVER THE LAST COUPLE
OF YEARS AND THE SOURCE FOR
THAT CRASH DATA.
WELL, ALL OF THE CRASHES THAT
WE&apos;RE USING IS THE MICHIGAN
CERTIFIED CRASH DATA SET AND WE
ACCESS IT VIA ROAD SOFT AND
TRADITIONALLY THE COMMUNITY HAS
BEEN ABLE TO ACCESS THAT EITHER
THROUGH SOME HOGG&apos;S REPORTING
TOOLS OR IN TRAFFIC CRASH FACTS
STARTING THIS YEAR AND I
BELIEVE YOU ALREADY RECEIVED
THE LINK TO THE WEBSITE.
WE ARE NOW PRODUCING OUR CRASH
REPORTING IN A MORE INTERACTIVE
MODULE ON OUR WEBSITE SO I HAVE
SOME PRESENTATION SLIDES
PREPARED TO WALK THROUGH THAT
AND WALK THROUGH THAT PROCESS.
&gt;&gt; THEY ARE IT IS VERY VISUAL.
WE WORK WITH CRASH DATA TENDS
TO BE VERY VISUAL.
I WILL COMMIT TO CLEARING ALL
OF MY SLIDES AND DESCRIBING ALL
OF THE IMAGERY THAT ARE ON MY
SLIDES.
BUT I DO WANT TO POINT OUT TO
ALL THE COMMISSIONERS AND TO
THE COMMUNITY AT LARGE THAT IF
YOU EVER HAVE QUESTIONS ABOUT
CRASH DATA AND YOU NEED ACCESS
TO THAT INFORMATION IN A
DIFFERENT WAY, DEFINITELY REACH
OUT TO STAFF AND WE WILL MAKE
SURE THAT WE GET THAT READY.
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE THAT PREPARED FOR
YOU AND WE CAN MAKE THAT
ACCESSIBLE FROM SO GO AHEAD AND
SHARE MY SCREEN IF SOMEONE
COULD PLEASE CONFIRM THAT YOU
ARE SEEING A PRESENTATION SLIDE
THAT LOOKS LIKE A WEB PAGE.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
&gt;&gt; OK, SO THIS FIRST SLIDE IS
IS OUR LANDING PAGE FOR OUR
WEBSITE WHICH IS A TWO GAG
FLASH CRASH REPORTING ALL ONE
WORD.
&gt;&gt; THIS IS A SCREEN CAPTURE
IMAGE OF THE WEBSITE SO YOU&apos;LL
SEE THE TYPICAL ELEMENTS OF THE
ALL THE STUFF UP AT THE HEADER.
&gt;&gt; THIS PAGE IS HOUSED UNDER
ENGINEERING.
&gt;&gt; YOU HAVE SOME OTHER LINKS ON
THE LEFT BA AND THEN THE CRASH
REPORTING ITSELF.
SO THERE ARE SOME INTRODUCTORY
INFORMATION AND THEN THERE ARE
THREE MAJOR AREAS TO THIS PAGE
.
THERE&apos;S THE CRASH TYPE SOME
FREQUENCY&apos;S AREA, THE SPATIAL
ANALYSIS AREA AND THE CONTEXT
AND FURTHER DATA AREA.
SO THE FIRST THING THAT WE&apos;RE
GOING TO BE LOOKING AT WILL BE
THIS TRAFFIC CRASHES DASHBOARD
NOW I&apos;VE DONE ALL OF THIS IS
SCREEN CAPTURE SO THAT WE CAN
WALK THROUGH IT VERY SMOOTHLY.
I HOPE SOME OF YOU HAVE BEEN
ABLE TO START PLAYING WITH THIS
TOOL AND IF NOT I HOPE YOU&apos;LL
BE EXCITED TO GO PLAY WITH IT
TOMORROW.
&gt;&gt; SO ONCE YOU CLICK THAT AREA
THAT WAS HIGHLIGHTED ON THE
SLIDE WHICH WILL BRING YOU TO
THE DASHBOARD AND THIS IS THE
SCREENSHOT OF WHAT THE
DASHBOARD LOOKS LIKE AND THIS
DASHBOARD WAS PUT TOGETHER BY
OUR I.T. DEPARTMENT OR
ANALYTICS GROUP AND JUST A
LITTLE BIT OF INFORMATION ABOUT
WHAT THE SLIDE IS SHOWING.
IT SHOWS THE DASHBOARD WHEN YOU
OPEN IT IF FOR ANY REASON THE
DASHBOARD DOESN&apos;T OPEN FOR YOU
PROPERLY THE FIRST TIME PLEASE
JUST HIT REFRESH ON YOUR WEB
BROWSER.
UNFORTUNATELY THERE&apos;S A BUG IN
THE SOFTWARE THAT OUR I.T.
DEPARTMENT HAS INFORMED OF .
&gt;&gt; THERE IS A PATCH SUPPOSED TO
BE COMING OUT BUT IT WAS LAST
WEEK.
&gt;&gt; BUT JUST TO REFRESH WILL
RESET ALL OF THESE CHARTS AND
YOU&apos;LL BE ABLE TO SEE THEM JUST
FINE.
SO THIS IMAGE IS SHOWING OUR
OVERALL CROSSTAB AND IT SHOWS
ALL THE INJURY LEVELS AND NO
LIMITS ON THE TYPE OF CRASHES
THAT ARE INCLUDED IN OUR DATA.
YOU CAN CHARTS AVAILABLE IN
THIS PARTICULAR SECTION ARE
CRASHES BY YEAR AND THE CRASH
TYPES AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; SO FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO HAVE
BEEN TRAVELING WITH THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION FOR A
COUPLE OF YEARS OR OTHERWISE
HAVE SEEN OUR STATIC CRASH
REPORT THAT WE&apos;RE PUTTING WE&apos;VE
BEEN PUTTING OUT YOU CAN GET TO
ALL OF THOSE CRASHES THOSE
CHARTS THROUGH THIS THROUGH
THIS DASHBOARD AND AS FAR AS
YOU CAN LIMIT FILTER THINGS SO
THAT YOU CAN GO THROUGH AND SEE
EXACTLY WHAT IT IS THAT YOU
WANT TO BE LOOKING FOR.
&gt;&gt; I ALSO WANT TO POINT OUT
THAT IF YOU HOVER OVER ANY PART
OF THE CHART IT WILL GIVE YOU
DETAILED INFORMATION.
SO IN THIS CASE I DID A SCREEN
CAPTURE FROM FROM MY SCREEN
WHEN I WAS WORKING WITH THIS
EARLIER AND I WAS HOVERED OVER
THE TWENTY TWENTY ARE
SPECIFICALLY MY POINTER WHICH
DID NOT SHOW WAS HOVERED OVER
THE DOT ON THE FIVE YEAR
ROLLING AVERAGE LINE.
SO THERE THERE&apos;S A POP UP IT
STATES YEAR WHICH WAS TWENTY
TWENTY IT GIVES THE NUMBER
OF INCIDENTS THAT HAPPEN PER
INJURY LEVEL AND IT ALSO GIVES
THE FIVE YEAR ROLLING AVERAGE.
YOU&apos;LL NOTICE THE FIVE YEAR
ROLLING AVERAGE HIGHLIGHTED
IT&apos;S A LITTLE BIT BOLDER AND
IT&apos;S IN IN THE TEXT THAT&apos;S
BECAUSE THAT&apos;S WHERE THE THAT&apos;S
WHERE I WAS HOVERED OVER.
SO WHEREVER YOU ARE HAVE YOUR
POINTER THEN THAT WILL
HIGHLIGHT THAT PORTION OF THE
INFORMATION THAT IT&apos;S SHOWING
YOU SOME OTHER THINGS I WANTED
TO POINT OUT THIS NEXT SLIDE IT
HAS UP IMAGE OF THE FILTERS AND
THE SLIDE READS THAT YOU CAN
ADJUST FILTERS TO TO CUSTOMIZE
SO YOU CAN ADJUST AND CUSTOMIZE
WHAT YOU&apos;RE LOOKING FOR.
YOU CAN SELECT OR REMOVE
CRASHES BY WORST INJURY LEVEL
FOR THAT CRASH YOU CAN VIEW
ALL
CRASHES OR ISOLATE THE
VULNERABLE ROAD USERS.
AND I WANTED TO POINT OUT THAT
YOU HAVE TO SELECT APPLY
FILTERS TO SEE THE UPDATED
RESULTS SO THE FILTER BUTTON
WILL LOOK GRAY UNLESS YOU&apos;VE
CHANGED SOMETHING AND THEN IT
CHANGES COLOR TO REMIND YOU
THAT YOU DO NEED TO PUSH THAT
THAT FILTER BUTTON WHICH WE
ALSO HAVE AN ENLARGED IMAGE
OF THE FILTER BUTTONS RIGHT
HERE AND YOU CAN CLEAR ALL
OF YOUR FILTERS RATHER EASILY
JUST BY CLICKING CLEAR OFF.
IT&apos;S A LITTLE BIT ON HOW TO USE
THAT TOOL.
&gt;&gt; SO I WANTED TO GIVE EVERYONE
A LITTLE BIT OF A COMPARISON
OF THE THE NEW IMAGERY VERSUS
THE OLD GRAPHS THAT YOU ARE
USED TO SEEING.
SO ON THIS SLIDE AT THE TOP I
HAVE ALL LEVELS OF INJURY
CRASHES AND SO IT&apos;S ALL OF OUR
CRASHES AT ALL LEVELS OF INJURY
.
&gt;&gt; IT HAS THE BAR CHART PER
YEAR WITH OUR ROLLING FIVE YEAR
AVERAGE AND THEN BELOW THAT
IT&apos;S JUST THE SAME INFORMATION
PRESENTED AS IT WAS PREVIOUSLY
PRESENTED IN OUR STATIC REPORT
.
HIGHLIGHTS ARE THAT IN THE YEAR
2020 WE SAW SECOND RATE
REDUCTION IN CRASHES ACROSS THE
BOARD AND IN TWENTY TWENTY ONE
THEY CAME UP A LITTLE BIT BUT
THEY ARE STILL DOWN COMPARED TO
WHERE THEY WERE PRE PANDEMIC.
THIS NEXT SLIDE IS ALSO SHOWING
ALL CRASH SITES AND THIS IS OUR
FATAL AND SEVERE INJURY CHARTS
.
&gt;&gt; SO JUST A COMPARISON OF WHAT
THE NEW FATAL AND SEVERE INJURY
CHART LOOKS LIKE COMPARED TO
WHAT THE OLD FATAL SEVERE
INJURY CHART LOOKS LIKE MOVING
ALONG I THIS SLIDE SHOWS AN
IMAGE CAPTURE OF I JUST
FILTERED THE CRASHES BY YEAR
FOR PEDESTRIAN INVOLVED.
&gt;&gt; SO RIGHT NOW WE HAVE
FILTERING ON THIS OVERALL TAB
FOR THE WORST INJURY LEVEL AND
FOR PEDESTRIANS.
SO YOU CAN DO PEDESTRIANS ONLY
AND YOU CAN DO BIKEL.
&gt;&gt; THAT&apos;S ALL BASED ON THE
STATIC REPORT THAT WE&apos;VE DONE
PREVIOUSLY.
&gt;&gt; SO WE ARE IF THERE IS AN
INTEREST IN HAVING SOME
ADDITIONAL FILTERS WE CAN LOOK
AT THAT DEFINITELY LOOK FOR
YOUR FEEDBACK ON ON ANY
OF THESE ITEMS.
BUT THAT IS SOMETHING THAT I
WANTED TO POINT OUT THAT ALL
THE CHARTS THAT ARE AVAILABLE
RIGHT NOW ARE THE SAME CHARTS
THAT WERE PRODUCED IN THE
STATIC REPORT PREVIOUSLY.
ALL RIGHT.
SO MOVING ON TO THE NEXT SLIDE
.
WHAT I&apos;VE DONE HERE IS I HAVE
MOVED FROM THE OVERALL SHAPE TO
THE TEMPORAL CROSSTAB.
SO THIS TAB CONTAINS CHARTS
BREAKING DOWN CRASHES BY TIME
OF DAY.
SO LIKE DAVE WEEK, MONTH, MONTH
OF THE YEAR OR HOUR OF THE DAY
AND ALSO CONDITIONS THAT WE&apos;VE
PREVIOUSLY REPORTED ON SUCH AS
WEATHER LIGHTING AND AS AS I
STATED PREVIOUSLY, THESE ARE
ALL THOSE TEMPORAL CHARTS THAT
WERE AVAILABLE IN THE STATIC
CHART AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; WE HAVE FILLED THE SAME
FILTERING FOR THIS SET
OF CHARTS THAT WAS AVAILABLE
FOR THE OVERALL SET OF CHARTS
AND MOVING ALONG THE LAST TAB
THAT IS AVAILABLE ON THE
DASHBOARD IS OUR VIOLATIONS
TAB.
SO THIS TAB PROVIDES THE
ABILITY TO EXPLORE THE TYPES
OF VIOLATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
INVOLVED IN IN THE CITIES
CRASHES.
&gt;&gt; SO JUST TO GIVE YOU A LITTLE
BIT INFORMATION ABOUT THIS THIS
PARTICULAR SCREEN CAPTURE, IT&apos;S
IT&apos;S SHOWING TABS AT ALL OF THE
INJURY LEVELS AND I HAVE THIS
HERE I DID NOT ADJUST THE THE
BASELINE FILTERING FOR THE
VIOLATION ON THIS ONE BUT ON
THIS NEXT SLIDE I ADJUSTED THE
CRASH VIOLATION TO BE TRUE
OF LEFT OF CENTER JUST BECAUSE
I WAS CURIOUS TO SEE HOW THAT
ONE WOULD COME OUT.
&gt;&gt; AND SO YOU CAN SEE WE HAVE
ALL OF THE DATA THAT&apos;S
AVAILABLE AND I HAVE HOVERED
OVER TWENTY TWENTY ONE TO SHOW
THAT YOU KNOW WHAT OUR OUR
RESULTS IN TWENTY TWENTY ONE
WERE.
&gt;&gt; SO WE HAVE ONE NON
INCAPACITATING INJURY, THREE
POSSIBLE INJURIES.
TWELVE PROPERTY DAMAGE ONLY
INJURIES AND THE ROLLING FIVE
YEAR AVERAGE IS SIXTEEN POINT
SIX CRASHES PER YEAR AND THERE
ARE NO SERIOUS INJURY CRASHES
IN TWENTY TWENTY ONE SO THERE
AREN&apos;T ANY REPORTED IN THAT.
HOWEVER OK THE NEXT SLIDE IS
THE SAME SET OF DATA AND I&apos;M
JUST POINTING OUT THAT IN THE
UPPER RIGHT HAND CORNER THERE&apos;S
A LITTLE GRAY BUTTON.
IT HAS A NUMBER IT HAS A COUPLE
OF LINES ON IT AND WHEN YOU
CLICK ON THAT BUTTON IT&apos;LL JUST
POP UP AND REMIND YOU OF WHAT
FILTERS YOU HAVE APPLIED AND
THE LAST THING THAT I WANTED TO
POINT OUT IN THESE PARTICULAR
CHARTS IS THAT NEXT TO THAT
GRAY BUTTON THERE&apos;S A LITTLE
THREE DOT YOU KNOW, FINEMORE
HERE SORT OF ICON AND WHEN YOU
CLICK ON THAT ICON YOU CAN DO A
COUPLE OF THINGS.
&gt;&gt; YOU CAN FORCE A REFRESH YOU
CAN WHICH ARE DATA DOESN&apos;T
CHANGE OFTEN ENOUGH THAT YOU
NECESSARILY NEED TO DO THAT.
&gt;&gt; BUT THE TWO THE TWO REALLY
CRITICAL THINGS ARE I THINK TO
UNDERSTAND IS THAT YOU CAN
ENTER A FULL SCREEN MODE FOR A
SINGLE CHART OR YOU CAN
DOWNLOAD A CHART AND WHEN YOU
ENTER FULL SCREEN MODE THIS
NEXT SLIDE SHOWS WITH THAT FULL
SCREEN MODE LOOKS LIKE AND
THESE ARE PEDESTRIAN CRASHES
I&apos;VE JUST PULLED THEM UP.
I HAVEN&apos;T HOVERED OVER ANY DATA
SOURCES SO WE CAN SEE YOU KNOW,
AS WITH ALL OF OUR CRASHES WE
SAW SIGNIFICANT REDUCTIONS IN
TWENTY TWENTY SLIGHTLY HIGHER
AMOUNT IN TWENTY TWENTY ONE.
BUT THEN FOR EVERYONE I DID GO
AHEAD AND PULL OUR FATAL AND
SEVERE INJURY CRASHES FOR
PEDESTRIANS AND THIS IS ALSO
THAT FULL SCREEN MODE AND WE
HELD FAIRLY STEADY BETWEEN
TWENTY TWENTY ONE OR TWENTY
TWENTY AND TWENTY TWENTY ONE ON
ON THOSE WERE AVERAGING SEVEN
POINT TWO FOR SERIOUS INJURY
CRASHES PER YEAR.
SO WE STILL HAVE SOME WORK TO
DO.
ALL RIGHT.
SO OUR NEXT THING THAT I WANTED
TO LOOK AT IS THESE SPATIAL
ANALYSIS AREA OF THE WEBSITE
AND SO THE SLIDE IS SHOWING THE
WEBSITE AGAIN AND I&apos;VE
HIGHLIGHTED WHERE YOU CAN GET
TO THOSE CRASH MAPS AND THESE
ARE THE MAPS THAT HAVE BEEN
VERY POPULAR IN THE PAST.
SO IF YOU CLICK ON THE TRAFFIC
CRASH MAP LINK THAT WILL TAKE
YOU TO THE SAME APPS THAT YOU
HAVE SEEN IN THE STATIC REPORT
JUST IN THEIR NATIVE GISTS
FORMAT INSTEAD OF BEING
PRODUCED AS A PDF FOR FOR THE
FOR THE CITY.
SO THIS NEXT SLIDE IS SHOWING
WHAT THAT WEBSITE LOOKS LIKE
WHEN YOU CLICK INTO IT AND WHEN
YOU OPEN IT UP MAP THAT YOU
WILL SEE FIRST IS THE HEAT MAP
AND THEN OVER ON YOUR RIGHT
HAND SIDE THERE ARE WAYS TO
CHANGE THE MAP AND WHAT YOU&apos;RE
VIEWING.
SO THIS NEXT SLIDE SHOWS ZOOM
IN ON SOME OF THAT SO YOU CAN
FIND THE LAYERS WITH THE SYMBOL
THAT IS SHOWN HERE THAT IS IT
LOOKS LIKE SQUARE SHEETS
OF PAPER SITTING ON TOP OF EACH
OTHER AND I HAVE A LARGE BLOWUP
UP OF WHAT THOSE LAYERS ARE.
IF THERE&apos;S A STRIKE THROUGH THE
EYE, IT&apos;S OFF.
IF THERE ISN&apos;T, IT&apos;S ON AND
THEN YOU CAN ALSO GET THE KEY
FOR THE MAP.
SO FOR THE LAYER THAT WE WERE
JUST LOOKING AT THAT WAS OPEN,
IT&apos;S THE ALL DENSITY LAYER AND
THEN HERE IS AN IMAGE OF THE
KEY FOR THOSE CRASHES AND ONE
THING THAT YOU MIGHT BE
INTERESTED IN IS SHOWN IN THIS
NEXT SLIDE WHERE WE HAVE ZOOMED
INTO AN AREA THIS IS THE GLEN
AND FULLER AREA OF LEFT THAT
KEEP MAP ON.
BUT WHAT DOES THAT HEAT MAP
REALLY MEAN?
SO I&apos;VE TURNED THE VISUAL
CRASHES ON AS WELL SO THAT YOU
CAN LOOK AT FOR THAT PARTICULAR
HEAT WHAT WHAT&apos;S THE NUMBER
OF CRASHES WHERE THEY LOOK LIKE
AND YOU CAN HOVER ON ONE
OF THOSE CRASHES AND CLICK ON
IT AND GET MORE INFORMATION AND
ALL OF THOSE AREAS RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; MOVING ON THIS NEXT SLIDE IS
JUST HIGHLIGHTING THE LAST
SECTION ON THE WEBSITE WHICH IS
OUR CONTEXT AND FURTHER DATA
AREA.
&gt;&gt; SO IN THE STATIC REPORT WE
WOULD REFER TO STATEWIDE TRENDS
,NATIONAL TRENDS AND SOME DATA
AS WELL
.
THESE ARE THIS AREA IS
PROVIDING LINKS TO ALL OF THOSE
DATA SOURCES AND WITH THAT I&apos;M
GOING TO GO AHEAD AND START
SHARING AND OPEN UP FOR
CONVERSATION.
GREAT.
THANKS SO MUCH, BRETT.
I LOVE THESE DASHBOARDS REPS.
THESE ARE FANTASTIC AND THEY&apos;VE
BEEN LOOKING FORWARD TO
WONDERED IF YOU COULD TALK
ABOUT THE REFRESH RATE OF THE
DATA IN HERE AND WHETHER OR NOT
IT&apos;S LINKED TO THE MONTHLY
CITIZENVILLE TO STRAIGHTENERS
CRASH REPORT.
&gt;&gt; SO THIS DATA IS IT
REPRESENTS THE MICHIGAN
CERTIFIED DATA SET WHICH IS
CERTIFIED IN ANNUAL BASIS AND I
THINK WHEN WE&apos;RE IT&apos;S IMPORTANT
TO REMEMBER THAT WHEN WE ARE
LOOKING AT SYSTEMIC DEPLOYMENTS
AND WHEN WE ARE LOOKING AT, YOU
KNOW, SORT OF LIKE HOW HOW IS
THE SYSTEM FUNCTIONING THAT&apos;S
WHEN WE ARE LOOKING AT YOU
KNOW, THAT MORE LONG RANGE YOU
KNOW WHAT IS WHAT IS THE CHANGE
THAT WE&apos;RE HAVING OVER TIME.
SO WHEN WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT A
PARTICULAR PROJECT WE HAVE A
MUCH SMALLER KIND OF SCOPE
OF WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT WHAT&apos;S
GOING ON IN A PARTICULAR
INTERSECTION OR A PARTICULAR
CORRIDOR.
&gt;&gt; BUT WHEN WE ARE LOOKING AT,
YOU KNOW, THOSE SYSTEMIC
DEPLOYMENTS, WE&apos;RE REALLY
LOOKING AT THAT KIND OF THAT
LONGER RANGE OF WHAT&apos;S GOING ON
.
NO, IT&apos;S NOT BEING UPDATED ON A
MORE FREQUENT BASIS THAN
ANNUALLY.
&gt;&gt; IS THERE A PLAN TO SINCE THE
SINCE THE DATA AND THE
DASHBOARD STAYS THE SAME, IS
THERE A PLAN TO SORT OF ALSO
CREATE SOME KIND OF LIKE PDF
TYPE REPORT THAT USES ALL
OF THE THOSE MATERIALS?
I I ASK BECAUSE I SEND THAT
REPORT TO PEOPLE ALL THE TIME
AND I CAN IMAGINE THAT THERE&apos;S
UTILITY FOR SOMEONE NOT HAVING
TO FIGURE OUT HOW TO TURN ON
LAYERS AND STUFF LIKE THAT IF
IT&apos;S JUST LIKE GO TO PAGE 17
AND YOU&apos;LL SEE WHAT YOU NEED TO
SEE.
AND SO I&apos;M CURIOUS ABOUT
WHETHER WILL WE STILL GET A
STATIC REPORT SINCE THE DATA IS
STATIC?
OUR OUR INTENTION IS NOT TO
CONTINUE PRODUCING THAT REPORT.
I I&apos;M CURRENTLY WORKING WITH
SUSANNE FLOWERS, OUR PLANNER
WHO IS HEADING OUR VISION
SERIES IMPLEMENTATION TO &gt;&gt;
COME UP WITH OUR PLAN FOR HOW
HER REPORTING IS GOING TO BE IS
GOING TO LOOK.
AND YOU KNOW WHAT WHAT I&apos;M
PRODUCING AND WHAT I&apos;M WORKING
WITH OUR ENGINEERS FOLKS TO
PRODUCE FOR THE FOR THIS WILL
THEN FEED INTO WHAT WHAT SHE&apos;S
PRODUCING AND WHAT THAT IS
GOING TO LOOK LIKE IN ITS FINAL
FORM.
WE HAVEN&apos;T FIGURED OUT MUSASHI
FIGURED THAT OUT YET.
&gt;&gt; IT&apos;S HER REPORT BUT I THINK
IF THERE IF THERE IS A RAIMENT
YOU CAN FEEL FREE TO STEP IN AT
ANY POINT BECAUSE I&apos;M YOUR
STAFF AND I&apos;M ABOUT TO COMMIT
YOURSELF TO SOMETHING BUT I
THINK THERE&apos;S A THERE&apos;S A
PARTICULAR INTEREST AREA WHERE
WE WANT TO LOOK AT A DEEPER
DOVE AND THAT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT
WE HAVE DONE IN THE PAST OR
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION HAS
HAD AN INTEREST AND WANTED A
DEEPER DOVE REPORTED TO THEM ON
THE PARTICULAR TOPIC AREA THAT
THAT WE CAN STILL PRODUCE ONE
OF THOSE THOSE DEEPER DOVE
AREAS.
ONE OF THE NICE THINGS ABOUT
PRODUCING THE DATA IN THIS
FORMAT IS THAT IT FREES UP TIME
TO DO MORE OF THAT THAT DEEP
DOVE AND INSTEAD OF SPENDING
TIME, YOU KNOW, USED TO BE A
BIT OF A CUMBERSOME PROCESS
OF DOWNLOADING DATA AND THEN
MANUALLY MANIPULATING DATA AND
WORKING IT BACK UP INSTEAD WE
HAVE FOUND A TECHNOLOGY
SOLUTION WITH IT AND THE
ANALYTICS FOLKS TO WHERE THEY
HAVE IT SET UP SO THAT NOW IT
WILL PRODUCE THIS YOU KNOW, AND
WE&apos;RE GOING THROUGH AND WE&apos;RE
BACK CHECKING IT AND THINGS
LIKE THAT.
BUT THEN WE HAVE WE&apos;RE FREEING
UP TIME TO DO THOSE DEEPER
DIVES NOW AND I REALLY
APPRECIATE THAT.
I THINK SO FOR ME THE THE MAPS
THE CRASH MAPS ARE THE THINGS
THAT I&apos;M MOST LIKELY TRYING TO
POINT SOMEONE TO AND I ALSO MY
EXPERIENCE USING GIS IN
WEBSITES IS THAT IT CAN BE HARD
TO FIGURE OUT AND SO AGAIN
THAT&apos;S LIKE MAYBE THERE&apos;S AN
ABILITY TO LINK SOMEONE
DIRECTLY TO A PARTICULAR VISION
OF SOMETHING BUT ALSO IT&apos;S
OFTEN HARD TO DO ON A PHONE.
AND SO EVEN IF IT&apos;S A
COLLECTION OF MAPS THAT ARE
LIKE THE MAPS THAT WE USED TO
GET THAT ARE THIS TIME THEY&apos;RE
JUST SCREENSHOTS FROM THE
SYSTEM THAT YOU&apos;VE BUILT SO
THAT IT&apos;S NOT LIKE REBUILDING
THOSE MAPS FROM SCRATCH.
I THINK THE THAT WOULD BE
REALLY USEFUL.
SO THERE&apos;S OFTEN THESE MOMENTS
WHEN LIKE A SPECIFIC PROJECTS
COME COMES UP AT A SPECIFIC
INTERSECTION AND IT&apos;S LIKE
LET&apos;S CHECK THE MAPS AND
SOMETIMES I&apos;M HEARING FROM
RESIDENTS OR PEOPLE WHO DON&apos;T
NECESSARILY HAVE A TON
OF FAMILIARITY WITH THE CITY
LIKE WEB ENVIRONMENT AND
THEY&apos;VE NEVER WORKED WITH GE&apos;EZ
BEFORE AND THAT&apos;S THOSE ARE THE
KINDS OF SITUATIONS I&apos;M
THINKING OF WHERE BEING ABLE TO
HAVE SOME LIKE VERSIONS
OF THESE MAPS THAT I CAN SEND
TO PEOPLE AND THAT I THINK
OTHERS WOULD PROBABLY FIND
USEFUL AS WELL.
BUT I APPRECIATE THAT THIS IS
GOING TO SAVE STAFF A LOT
OF TIME AND ENABLE OTHER KINDS
OF ANALYSIS THAT WERE
PREVIOUSLY SPENT ON JUST
COMPILING ERICA, LIKE TO
REITERATE THIS IS GREAT.
IT&apos;S WONDERFUL TO SEE THIS UP
HERE.
IT&apos;S JUST LOVELY TO BE ABLE TO
HAVE THIS SUCCESSFUL EVERYBODY
AND BE ABLE TO DIG IN A LITTLE
BIT FURTHER.
I DO THINK THAT THERE IS
PROBABLY SOME UTILITY TO HAVING
UM I WOULD SAY IN TERMS
OF STACK REPORTS AT LEAST SORT
OF THE YEAR BY YEAR SORT
OF HERE&apos;S WHAT WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT
AND HERE ARE THE TRENDS SOME
PDF THAT COULD BE COULD BE
DOWNLOADED SO THAT IS FOLKS ARE
TOUCHING JUST LOOKING IN ONCE A
YEAR THEY CAN START SEEING SOME
TRENDS ON HOW THINGS ARE
SHIFTING THAT MIGHT BE HELPFUL.
I&apos;M THINKING PARTICULARLY IN
TERMS THE CONTEXT SIDE
OF THINGS WHICH REQUIRES YOU TO
DO A MUCH DEEPER DOVE INTO
TRANSPORTATION DATA WHICH IS
ALSO VERY INTERESTING AND FUN
BUT IT&apos;S NICE TO BE ABLE TO I
THINK IT&apos;D BE USEFUL TO HAVE US
HAVE COMPARISONS TO WHAT ANIBA
LOOKS LIKE VERSUS MICHIGAN
VERSUS THE UNITED STATES.
I THINK THAT THE WORK THAT
STAFF IS DOING IS REALLY
EVIDENT IN TERMS OF WHAT OUR
TRENDS LOOK LIKE VERSUS WHAT
MICHIGAN&apos;S TRENDS LOOK LIKE
VERSUS THE US TRENDS LOOK LIKE
IN THE LAST COUPLE OF YEARS.
&gt;&gt; SO BUT THEN I DO HAVE A
SPECIFIC QUESTION ON THE CRASH
TYPES AND FREQUENCY&apos;S DASHBOARD
,THAT FIRST ONE THAT&apos;S BACK ON
MY COMPUTER IS GOING TO BE SLOW
WHATEVER OF THE VIOLATIONS TAB
I&apos;M NOT SURE I LOOKING AT THAT
CORRECTLY.
SO IT SEEMS LIKE ONE OF THE
BENEFITS OF THIS PARTICULARLY
FOR TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
IS BEING ABLE TO LOOK AT WHAT
THOSE TYPES OF VIOLATIONS ARE
IN TERMS OF AND THEN WHAT ARE
THE TYPES OF CRASHES THAT ARE
HAPPENING.
&gt;&gt; AND SO IT&apos;S BECAUSE THAT
MIGHT DRIVE THE TYPES OF POLICY
SOLUTIONS THAT ARE DIFFERENT
TYPES OF PROJECTS THAT WE MIGHT
WANT TO BE FOCUSING ON A LITTLE
BIT MORE.
BUT IT&apos;S HARD FOR ME TO SEE
SORT OF LIKE WHAT&apos;S WHAT&apos;S THE
BIG PICTURE HERE IN TERMS
OF PERCENTAGE OF OF CRASHES
THAT ARE INVOLVING CARELESS
DRIVING AND MAYBE THEY INVOLVE
MULTIPLE DIFFERENT VIOLATIONS
BUT VERSUS FAILURE TO LEAD OR
SOME OF THOSE FACTORS IS THAT
POSSIBLE TO DO IN THIS?
AM I MISSING THAT OR IS THAT
NOT REALLY WHAT THIS IS AND
THIS VIOLATION JUST FOR THAT&apos;S
NOT POSSIBLE AT THIS TIME AND I
WILL HAVE TO WORK WITH STAFF TO
SEE IF WE CAN ACCOMPLISH THAT
IN IN THIS FORMAT GIVEN THE
TOLL THAT WE ALREADY OWN.
&gt;&gt; YEP, I IF THERE&apos;S I THINK
DEFINITELY IF THERE&apos;S SOMETHING
SPECIFIC THAT YOU HAVE AN
INTEREST IN THAT&apos;S SOMETHING
THAT WE COULD DEFINITELY TEASE
OUT SOME MORE GRANULAR DATA FOR
.
BUT IT&apos;S IT&apos;S DEFINITELY THE
KIND OF THING THAT YOU KNOW,
IT&apos;S NOT GOING TO BE AS EASY TO
AUTOMATE.
YEAH.
AND I DON&apos;T KNOW MAYBE THE I
DON&apos;T KNOW IF THAT&apos;S SOMETHING
THAT YOU HAVE ACCESS TO JUST
THINKING ABOUT.
OK, WHAT ARE THE WHAT ARE THE
TYPES OF VIOLATIONS THAT ARE
RESULTING IN FATALITIES VERSUS
YOU KNOW OH THAT YOU CAN DO I
LET ME CHECK SOMETHING REALLY
QUICKLY I HAVEN&apos;T HAD OPEN SO
THAT
I CAN PLAY WITH IT ON THE
SIDE.
I&apos;M GOING TO APPLY THOSE
FILTERS AND LET&apos;S SEE WHAT WE
END UP WITH.
YEAH OK SO YOU JUST CLICK ON
JUST FATALITY AND THEN JUST
FATALITIES AND AND JUST
INCAPACITATING INJURIES BUT AT
THIS POINT IN TIME IT&apos;S NOT
GOING TO SAY IT&apos;S NOT GIVING A
LIST EVERY THAT MANY OF EVERY
TYPE.
&gt;&gt; SO IT&apos;S LIKE THESE THESE ARE
THESE ARE THE NUMBERS WE HAVE
YOU KNOW.
SO IF WE WERE TO GO INTO
CARELESS DRIVING AND I CAN
SHARE THIS LET ME JUST SHARE MY
SCREEN AND I PULLED IT UP SO
I&apos;VE LIMITED TO FATALITIES AND
INCAPACITATING INJURIES.
IS IT COMING THROUGH?
YES.
OK AND THEN CARELESS DRIVING SO
YOU HERE&apos;S HERE&apos;S OUR RESULTS
THAT RECEIVED A CARELESS
DRIVING CITATION AND NOW YOU
CAN SEE THAT IT&apos;S IT IT&apos;S A
SMALL AMOUNT.
&gt;&gt; I DON&apos;T KNOW I COULD FIND
SOMETHING PROBABLY A FAILURE TO
YIELD IS MAYBE GOING TO BE
SOMETHING THAT WE&apos;RE INTERESTED
IN.
RIGHT.
SO THIS IS A LITTLE BIT HIGHER
LIKE WE CAN TELL THAT WE&apos;VE GOT
ROLLING WE HAVE A ROLLING FIVE
YEAR AVERAGE ON HERE SO WE HAVE
A TREND LINE THAT TELLS US
WHAT&apos;S GOING ON HERE.
SO THAT IS SOMETHING THAT WE
CAN WE CAN TEASE OUT AS WELL
THAT CAN BE TEASED OUT WITH
WITH THIS TOOL WITHOUT GOING
INTO GREATER DETAIL.
&gt;&gt; BUT AS FAR AS YOU KNOW, WHAT
TYPE OF CRASHES WERE THOSE
PARTICULAR FAILURE TO YIELD&apos;S?
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;RE GOING TO HAVE TO GET
INTO THE DATA ON THE BACK END
AND START PULLING OUT UDY TONS
AND READING THROUGH THE
ACCOUNTS TO REALLY UNDERSTAND
THAT WHICH YOU DID.
&gt;&gt; AND FOR THOSE OF YOU WHO ARE
FAMILIAR IS THE NAME OF THE
CRASH REPORT IN THE STATE
OF MICHIGAN.
THANKS SO MUCH.
YOU&apos;RE WELCOME.
BRET.
&gt;&gt; AND THEN PETE, I THINK I
REMEMBER PAST YEARS THERE IS
USUALLY A SECTION DEVOTED
IMPAIRED DRIVING LICENSE TO THE
LIST OF VIOLATIONS THAT IS
AVAILABLE.
&gt;&gt; I THINK KNOWING THAT THAT IS
NOT AVAILABLE IN THE LIST
OF VIOLATIONS IS A GREAT THING
TO TAKE BACK TO THE TEAM.
AND AS YOU&apos;RE EXPLORING THIS
TOOL, PLEASE, IF YOU HAVE
QUESTIONS, COMMENTS, THINGS
THAT YOU&apos;D LIKE TO SEE
ADDRESSED, YOU CAN REACH OUT TO
STAFF AND WE ARE HAPPY TO HEAR
THOSE COMMENTS AND CONCERNS SO
THAT WE CAN ADDRESS AS MANY
CONCERNS AS WE AS WE HAVE.
SO BE IMPAIRED DRIVING.
&gt;&gt; I WILL DEFINITELY POINT OUT
TO THE TEAM THANKS COMMISSIONER
HALLMARKING PETE.
SO THIS IS A REALLY GOOD DATA
HAVE ACCESS TO AND APPRECIATE
THIS NEW SYSTEM.
BUT AS IT RELATES TO FATAL
ACCIDENTS, FATAL CRASHES AND
SERIOUS INJURY CRASHES, I FEEL
LIKE I WOULD ALSO LIKE SOME
VISIBILITY NEW IN OUR ANNUAL
REPORT AS TO WHAT THE CITY AND
OTHER RESPONSIBLE PARTIES ARE
DOING TO RESOLVE THE PROBLEM
THAT RESULTED IN THAT SERIOUS
CRASH BECAUSE THAT REPRESENTS A
FAILURE IN THE SYSTEM.
SO WHAT IS THE WHAT IS THE
OUTLET FOR SHARING THAT?
&gt;&gt; WHAT DO WE HAVE ONE THAT IS
REALLY GETTING INTO MORE
OF WHAT ARE OUR VISION?
I THINK OUR VISION ZERO
REPORTING WILL BE AS WE&apos;RE
MOVING FORWARD AND THIS THIS IS
THE DATA THIS IS THE DATA
THAT&apos;S FEEDING SOME OF THOSE
PROCESSES.
&gt;&gt; BUT AS FAR AS WHERE WE ARE
ON THE PLAN GOALS AND HOW WE&apos;RE
WE&apos;RE MOVING SOME OF THOSE
SYSTEMIC CHANGES FORWARD THAT
WILL BE IN THE VISIONS YOU WERE
REPORTING I GUESS I&apos;M I&apos;M NOT
TALKING ABOUT OUR PERFORMANCE
TO GOALS NECESSARILY BUT RATHER
A BACKWARDS LOOKING LOOKING
BACKWARDS WHAT HAPPENS IN EACH
OF THESE SERIOUS CRASH
INCIDENTS LIKE IF WE AREN&apos;T
FOLLOWING UP ON WHAT CAUSED
THOSE THEN WE AREN&apos;T ADDRESSING
THAT SERIOUS FAILURE IN THE
SYSTEM.
SO WHERE DO WE WHERE DO WE LOOK
FOR WHAT THE CITY HAS DONE TO
ADDRESS THOSE SERIOUS CRASHES?
I WOULD LIKE THAT ANNUALLY IN
ONE PLACE AND I ALSO WOULD SAY
THAT I THINK WAITING A YEAR TO
SHARE THAT INFORMATION WITH THE
COMMUNITY IS TOO LONG.
I THINK THAT WE SHOULD HAVE A
FASTER RESPONSE FOR TELLING
PEOPLE WHAT WE ARE GOING WHAT
WE ARE DOING TO DEAL WITH
SERIOUS CRASHES OF SERIOUS
FAILURES IN OUR TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEM FASTER THAN ONCE PER
YEAR.
SO THAT&apos;S I GUESS MY FEEDBACK
ON THAT TOPIC.
YEAH, AND I&apos;LL TAKE A STAB AT
THIS ONE AND MAYBE LIEUTENANT
SHERBERT CAN HELP OUT AS WELL.
SO ONE OF THE THINGS WE ARE
TRYING TO DO IS STRENGTHEN THE
LINES OF COMMUNICATION BETWEEN
THE TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERS
AND THE POLICE DEPARTMENT SO
THAT WHEN THERE IS A SERIOUS
CRASH THAT&apos;S RESULTING IN
SERIOUS INJURY OR FATALITY THAT
WE HAVE SORT OF A COORDINATED
RESPONSE.
SO OBVIOUSLY THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT HAS A REGIMENT SORT
OF CRASH ANALYSIS THAT THEY
PERFORM.
ONE OF THE THINGS THAT WE WANT
TO TRY TO DO IS TO MAKE SURE
THAT IF A CRASH OCCURS TO DO A
SCAN OF THE INFRASTRUCTURE.
RIGHT.
SO YOU KNOW, IS THE SIGNAGE IN
PLACE, THE STREET LIGHTS
WORKING PAVEMENT MARKINGS CLEAR
THAT SORT OF THING AND IF IT&apos;S
NOT, YOU KNOW, REMEDY THOSE AS
SOON AS HUMANLY POSSIBLE.
SO I THINK THAT&apos;S PART OF THE
SOLUTION.
SIT THERE AND THEN I THINK TO
THE POINT THAT CYNTHIA IS
BRINGING UP IS YOU KNOW, YOU&apos;RE
RIGHT THE EVERY FATALITY, EVERY
SERIOUS INJURY SHOULD BE TAKEN
SERIOUSLY.
&gt;&gt; RIGHT.
AND WE WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT
WE DON&apos;T GLOSS OVER YOU KNOW,
THESE ARE HUMAN LIVES WE&apos;RE
TALKING ABOUT AND WE WANT TO
MAKE SURE THAT WE GET TO THE
ROOT CAUSE.
I WILL NOTE THAT SOMETIMES AND
AGAIN LIEUTENANT SCHERBA CAN
CAN HOPEFULLY BACK ME UP ON
THIS SOMETIMES THEY ARE
BEHAVIORAL, RIGHT?
IN SOME INSTANCES IT&apos;S IMPAIRED
DRIVING AS WE TALKED ABOUT
EARLIER IN THE MEETING.
AND SO WHEN WE TALK ABOUT THOSE
BEHAVIORAL THINGS, THERE ARE
STILL THOSE CUES FROM THE
INFRASTRUCTURE WHICH AGAIN GO
BACK TO THIS IDEA OF A SYSTEM
APPROACH TO WHAT ARE THE THINGS
THAT WE CAN DO TO MAKE SURE
THAT WE&apos;RE DRIVING DOWN SPEEDS
AT A SYSTEM LEVEL.
SO WHILE THERE MAY HAVE NOT
BEEN AN INFRASTRUCTURE
DEFICIENCY AT THAT EXACT
LOCATION, WHEN WE PULL UP ONE
OF THE SORT OF SYSTEM WIDE
IMPROVEMENTS WE&apos;RE MAKING TO
ENSURE THAT WE MINIMIZE THE
SEVERITY OF THOSE CRASHES WHEN
THEY DO OCCUR.
SO IT IS SOMETHING WHERE WE&apos;RE
THINKING ABOUT IT IS SOME
OF THE THINGS THAT WE&apos;RE
FEEDING INTO THE WORK THAT
WE&apos;RE WORKING WITH.
SAM SCHWARTZ, WE HAVEN&apos;T
PERFECTED AND I I DO CAUTION US
TO WE WE ALWAYS WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT WE&apos;RE YOU KNOW,
MOVING FORWARD TO MAKE THE
CHANGE THAT&apos;S REALLY GOING TO
RESULT IN THE OUTCOMES THAT WE
HOPE TO ACHIEVE.
RIGHT.
AND SOMETIMES IF IF IT&apos;S A
BEHAVIORAL PROBLEM THAT WE OR
LET&apos;S SAY THE CRASHES RESULT
OF A BEHAVIORAL INSTANCE, YOU
WE DON&apos;T WANT TO RUSH IT
THROUGH INFRASTRUCTURE
IMPROVEMENT AT THAT LOCATION IF
THAT ISN&apos;T GOING TO NECESSARILY
BE THE SOLUTION AND I DON&apos;T
THINK THAT&apos;S WHAT YOU&apos;RE
SUGGESTING BUT IT IS SOMETHING
THAT WE ARE COGNIZANT OF .
WE&apos;RE TRYING TO FIGURE OUT AND
BE AS COORDINATED WITH PD AS
MUCH AS POSSIBLE AND REALLY DO
THIS SYSTEM WIDE APPROACH SO
THAT YOU KNOW, THE SYSTEM AS A
WHOLE IS SAFE WHILE AT THE SAME
TIME ADDRESSING THOSE SPECIFIC
CONCERNS THAT YOU RAISE.
AND I KNOW I&apos;M KIND OF DANCING
AROUND THE ISSUE BECAUSE IT&apos;S
IT&apos;S HARD YOU KNOW, EVERY CRASH
IS KIND OF UNIQUE BOTH IN TERMS
OF LOCATION CAUSE AND EFFECT
AND THERE IS NO, YOU KNOW,
SOLUTION THE SAME SOLUTION YOU
CAN&apos;T APPLY ACROSS THE BOARD
AND SO I THINK WE&apos;RE TRYING TO
BE BETTER ABOUT HOW WE RESPOND
TO THOSE.
I WOULD JUST LIKE TO ADD THAT
WHEN I SAY THAT WE NEED A
CORRECTIVE ACTION THAT COULD BE
ENFORCEMENT OR IT COULD BE
EDUCATION.
RIGHT.
I MEAN BUT I I FEEL LIKE WE
NEED TO HAVE A CORRECTIVE
ACTION APPLIED TO EACH OF THESE
AND THAT&apos;S SO THANK THANK YOU
RENEE
.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M NOT SEEING OTHER HANDS
AND WE&apos;RE ALSO NEARING THE END
OF OUR TIME SO I THINK WE&apos;RE
GOING WRAP THIS UP BUT I HOPE
WE&apos;LL ALL KEEP EXPLORING THE
NEW TOOLS.
THANK YOU SO MUCH, CYNTHIA AND
YOUR TEAM FOR GETTING THIS
BUILT.
I THINK IT&apos;S GOING TO BE REALLY
VALUABLE TOOL FOR THE WHOLE
CITY
SO YEAH.
THANKS SO MUCH AND OTHER
QUESTIONS AND FEEDBACK WE CAN
JUST SEND ALONG ENVIRONMENT
STUFF COMES UP SO NEXT ANNUAL
TWENTY TWENTY TWO ANNUAL REPORT
WHICH IS QUICK WITH RAYMOND.
YEAH THIS IS JUST A HEADS OFF.
WE ARE GOING TO BEGIN WORK ON A
TWENTY TWENTY TWO ANNUAL REPORT
AND SO THERE IS A CHARGE FOR
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
TO REPORT ANNUALLY TO CITY
COUNCIL AND THE CITY
ADMINISTRATOR REGARDING
ACTIVITIES OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION WHICH
SHALL REFLECT THE EFFECTIVENESS
OF THE CITY&apos;S TRANSPORTATION
STRATEGY PROCESS AND MAKE
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR ANY CHANGES
THERE TO OR WHATEVER THAT
MEANS.
BUT I GUESS WHAT I&apos;M SUGGESTING
HERE IS IT&apos;S INCLUDED IN THE
HOMEWORK WAS A LINK TO LAST
YEAR&apos;S REPORT.
IF ANY OF YOU WANT TO GIVE OUT
A QUICK LOOK SEE AND LET US
KNOW IF THERE ARE ANY
RECOMMENDED CHANGES FOR NEXT
YEAR&apos;S REPORT, CHRIS IS GOING
TO HELP ME COMPILE THAT.
SO WE&apos;RE JUST LOOKING FOR SOME
INITIAL DIRECTION.
AND THE OTHER THING THAT I&apos;M
REALLY LOOKING FOR HERE ARE
VOLUNTEERS TYPICALLY IN THE
PAST THE CHAIR HAS WRITTEN THE
FORWARD AND THEN WE&apos;VE ALSO
GOTTEN ANOTHER VOLUNTEER TO DO
A SORT OF TESTIMONIAL ABOUT
EITHER TRANSPORTATION IN
GENERAL OR THE WORK OF THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
SPECIFICALLY LAST YEAR ONLY
WITH THE ONE THAT GRACED US
WITH WORDS AND MOLLY OF COURSE
GRACED US WITH HERS IN THE
FORWARD.
SO YOU KNOW, IF WE HAVE
VOLUNTEERS TODAY WE CAN KIND OR
GIVE YOU SOME BACKGROUND
INFORMATION ABOUT HOW THAT
COULD BE STRUCTURED.
BUT WE&apos;RE NOT LOOKING TO
PRODUCE OR FINALIZE OR REPORT
TILL JANUARY BECAUSE THIS IS
MEANT TO CAPTURE EVERYTHING UP
THROUGH THE DECEMBER MEETING.
SO REALLY JUST LOOKING FOR ANY
GUIDANCE AND ANY VOLUNTEERS AT
THIS TIME.
THANKS.
AND IS THIS ARE YOU LOOKING FOR
THESE THINGS RIGHT NOW OR IS
THIS SOMETHING ARE WE WE SHOULD
READ STUFF AND GET YEAH.
&gt;&gt; I THINK FOR RECOMMENDATIONS
ON HOW TO IMPROVE A REPORT YOU
CAN KEEP THOSE COMING OVER THE
NEXT MONTH.
THAT&apos;S WELCOME.
IF ANYBODY IS JUST ITCHING TO
RAISE THEIR HAND TO VOLUNTEER
TO WRITE ANY OF THESE PASSAGES
IT&apos;S HOPEFULLY I&apos;M NOT SPEAKING
FOR FOLKS ON THE COMMISSION BUT
MAYBE ONE WE WERE OR MOLLY CAN
ATTEST I DON&apos;T THINK IT&apos;S THAT
HEAVY OF A LIFT AND STAFF CAN
ALSO HELP PROVIDE BACKGROUND OR
DATA OR WHATEVER YOU MIGHT NEED
TO HELP WITH YOUR PASSAGE.
SO IT&apos;S REALLY JUST TO PUT A
FACE TO THE NAME SORT OF THING
AND KIND OF MAKE IT MORE
PERSONAL AND HUMANIZE THE
REPORT SO IF WE DO A VOLUNTEER
NOW WE&apos;RE HAPPY TO TAKE THEM SO
THAT WAY WE CAN START THAT
COORDINATION PROCESS.
&gt;&gt; I THINK BRAD AND JULIE HAVE
ALSO DONE THOSE IN PAST YEARS
SO NEW KIDS WE&apos;RE LOOKING AT
YOU.
IT&apos;S SUPER EASY AND LIKE IT&apos;S
NOT A HAPPY US AND BIG PICTURE
OF YOU IN THE REPORT.
SO THINK ABOUT IT.
&gt;&gt; WE&apos;LL PESTER YOU AGAIN IN A
MONTH.
GREAT.
I&apos;M JUST GOING TO KEEP US
MOVING RIGHT ALONG SO CLOSE
TONIGHT VISION ZERO
IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE UPDATE
.
&gt;&gt; YEAH.
INCLUDED IN THE PACKET WAS THE
PRESENTATION THAT WAS GIVEN AT
THE OCTOBER TWENTY FOURTH
MEETING.
I WILL ACTUALLY NOT GO INTO
THAT GIVEN HOW MUCH TIME WE
HAVE BUT I DO WANT TO QUICKLY
SHARE WITH YOU THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT TOOL THAT WE&apos;RE
WORKING ON BECAUSE I DO THINK
YOU WILL FIND THAT OF INTEREST.
I&apos;M GOING TO SCROLL THROUGH IT
VERY QUICKLY SO MY APOLOGIES
BUT I DO THE LINK IS INCLUDED
BOTH IN THE HOMEWORK GUIDE OR
NO I&apos;M SORRY IT&apos;S INCLUDED IN
THE PACKET AS THE PRESENTATION
PACKET AS WELL AS ON THE
WEBSITE.
&gt;&gt; SO I&apos;LL HIGHLIGHT BOTH
OF THOSE REAL QUICKLY.
&gt;&gt; SO THE BULK OF THE MEETING
WAS REALLY FOCUSED ON THIS
SPEED MANAGEMENT PROGRAM AND
KIND OF HIGHLIGHTING IT FOR THE
THE DECISIONS ARE
IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE.
SO THAT&apos;S WHY I THOUGHT I
WANTED TO QUICKLY SHOW SHOWCASE
FOR YOU SINCE IT WAS THE
MAJORITY OF WHAT WE DISCUSSED
ABOUT SO THERE&apos;S THIS NEW
ONLINE WEBSITE FAIRLY
INTERACTIVE, PRETTY NICE AND IT
KIND OF STEPS THROUGH THESE
KIND OF FOUR HEADERS OF WHY
SPEED MANAGEMENT WHAT ARE THE
TOOLS WHERE IN ANN ARBOR AND
PROVIDE INPUT SO WHY SPEED
MANAGEMENT GIVES A LOT OF THE
BACKGROUND INFORMATION THAT
YOU&apos;VE HEARD FROM US BEFORE
ABOUT THE IMPORTANCE
OF REDUCING SPEEDS FOR SAFETY
PURPOSES AND WHY THE FOCUS ON
MAJOR STREETS IN TERMS OF WHERE
A LOT OF OUR CRASHES ARE
HAPPENING WHEN IT TALKS ABOUT
WHAT THE SPEED MANAGEMENT
TOOLBOX IS?
THE IDEA IS WE REALLY WANT TO
SHOWCASE THE TYPES OF TOOLS
THAT WOULD BE APPROPRIATE ON
CERTAIN TYPES OF ROADWAYS AND
SO IT TALKS ABOUT THE DIFFERENT
TYPES OF DEVICES.
HORIZONTAL DEFLECTION MEANS
THINGS YOU DRIVE AROUND CROSS
SECTION MODIFICATIONS.
SO THIS WOULD BE LIKE IN
MARRYING ROADWAYS THINGS YOU
DRIVE OVER SUCH AS SPEED HUMPS
AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
SUCH AS SIGNAGE OR MARKINGS.
AND THEN WHAT&apos;S KIND OF NICE AS
YOU SCROLL DOWN THE PAGE IT
REALLY GIVES THIS NICE KIND
OF THERE&apos;S A PHOTOGRAPH THAT
SHOWS A PICTURE OF THE DEVICE.
SO THE FIRST ONE THAT COMES UP
I BELIEVE ARE ORGANIZED
ALPHABETICALLY IS THE CHICANE.
SO THERE&apos;S A NICE PICTURE OF A
CHICANE AND THEN IT ALSO
DESCRIBES IT SO IT&apos;S ALSO
CALLED A LATERAL SHIFT TALKS
ABOUT WHAT TYPE OF DEVICE IT
IS.
IT&apos;S THE HORIZONTAL DEFLECTION
DEVICE.
IT TALKS ABOUT WHAT CITIES HAVE
USE THEM AND IT ALSO GIVES YOU
A LINK TO THE APPLICATION
OF THAT AND SO IT SCROLLS
THROUGH THESE REALIGNED
INTERSECTION TRAFFIC CIRCLE
ROUND ABOUT LANE REDUCTION ON
STREET PARKING.
SO THESE ARE ALL THE TOOLS BIKE
LANES, LANE NARROWING, RAISED
MEDIANS, CURB EXTENSIONS AND WE
TRIED TO CAPTURE AS MANY
PHOTOGRAPHS FROM ANN ARBOR WHEN
AVAILABLE CHOKERS OR PINCH
POINTS PEDESTRIAN ISLAND STREET
TREES AND LANDSCAPING SPEED
HUMPS OR CUSHIONS THE TABLES
AND AND I THINK WE&apos;RE GETTING
TO THE END RAISED CROSSWALKS,
RAISED INTERSECTIONS, SPEED
FEEDBACK SIGNS IN PEDESTRIAN
CROSSING SIGNS, PAVEMENT
LEGENDS, RECTANGULAR RAPID
FLASHING BEACONS, PAVEMENT
MATERIAL STREET ART.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;M SORRY I&apos;M GOING TO
SCROLL TO BE A LITTLE BIT
FASTER.
ALL RIGHT.
I GET GET THAT GET YOU THROUGH
THE DEVICES AND SO AGAIN THIS
IS TAKING THESE SORT OF TRAFFIC
CALMING DEVICES OR SPEED
MANAGEMENT DEVICES AND REALLY
EXPLAINING THEM GIVING EXAMPLES
SO PEOPLE UNDERSTAND WHAT THEY
ARE.
THEN WHEN WE TALK ABOUT WHERE
IN ANN ARBOR THE IDEA IS TO
REALLY HONE IN ON WHAT TYPES
OF ROADS THESE WOULD APPLY TO.
SO THIS IS A MAJOR STREET SPEED
MANAGEMENT SO WE IDENTIFY THE
MAJOR STREETS AND KIND OF TALK
ABOUT THE PRIORITY IS BASED ON
THE NUMBER OF CRASHES
TRANSLATING THAT INTO THE
NOMENCLATURE OF THE PLAN.
THESE ARE LIKE THE TIER ONE AND
TIER TWO CORRIDORS DOWN TO
CORRIDORS THAT DON&apos;T HAVE
SAFETY TARGETS DENSIFIED FOR
THEM.
AND YOU CAN KIND OF ZOOM IN YOU
CAN CLICK ON, YOU KNOW, A
SEGMENT OF ROADWAY AND I THINK
IT WILL DISPLAY SOME
INFORMATION.
YEAH.
SO MILLER AVENUE IT KIND GIVES
ALL THIS DETAIL ABOUT, YOU
KNOW, THE POSTED SPEED LIMIT,
THE NUMBER OF LANES, THE AMOUNT
OF TRAFFIC ON THERE AND AND
TALKS ABOUT THE POSSIBLE TOOLS
WHICH REFERENCES YOU BACK UP TO
WHAT YOU JUST WENT THROUGH.
&gt;&gt; AND THEN THE OTHER THING
THAT WE&apos;RE TRYING TO DO IS
FIGURE OUT A WAY TO PROVIDE
FEEDBACK.
SO AND AS MUCH AS WE WANT THE
PROCESS TO BE DATA DRIVEN, WE
ALSO KNOW THAT YOU PEOPLE FEEL
STRONGLY ABOUT THESE THINGS AND
WE WANT TO PROVIDE THE
OPPORTUNITY FOR FOLKS TO KIND
OF GIVE A BUMP IF THERE&apos;S A LOT
OF COMMUNITY SUPPORT FOR
CERTAIN CORRIDORS.
AND SO THIS IDEA OF A SORT
OF SUPPORT FORM OR IS EMBEDDED
INTO THE DOCUMENT AS WELL.
&gt;&gt; AND SO THAT IS THE
STORYBOARD AS IT EXISTS NOW AND
WE ARE CURRENTLY ACCEPTING
COMMENTS ON THIS.
SO IF YOU WERE TO GO TO THE
CITIES MOVING TOGETHER TOWARDS
VISION, IS THERE A WEBSITE
WHICH IS JUST THE CITY&apos;S
WEBSITE?
ETCHBERGER VISION ZERO IS THE
SHORTHANDS YOU WERE TO JUST GO
THERE IT TAKES YOU TO THE
LANDING PAGE FOR VISION ZERO
PLAN THERE.
IT GIVES YOU KIND OF THE
OVERVIEW THAT I JUST GAVE YOU
ABOUT THE SPEED MANAGEMENT
PROGRAM BUT THERE ARE A COUPLE
OF LINKS DOWN.
THERE IS FEEDBACK TO THIS
PROGRAM IS NEW AND WE WELCOME
QUESTIONS AND COMMENTS AND IF
YOU WERE TO CLICK ON THAT, IT
WILL TAKE YOU TO AN ONLINE FORM
THAT WILL ALLOW YOU TO AFTER
YOU&apos;VE GONE THROUGH THE TOOL IF
YOU HAVE SUGGESTIONS FOR
IMPROVEMENT, WE&apos;RE ALL EARS
BECAUSE WE&apos;RE STILL KIND
OF BETA TESTING THIS
SOCIALIZING IT IN PUBLIC.
WE HAVE GONE OUT TO SEVERAL
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT EVENTS.
WE WERE AT THE FARMER&apos;S MARKET
AND THE LIBRARY&apos;S IN THE MONTH
OF OCTOBER AND SO WE ARE HAVE
ALREADY GOTTEN SOME SOME
FEEDBACK ON THE TOOL AND EVEN
HAD A SORT OF ASSIM ACTIVITY
WHERE WE HAD A SORT OF BOARD
THAT HAD A VIRTUAL ROAD ON IT
AND PEOPLE COULD RECONFIGURE
THE ROAD WITH SOME OF THESE
TOOLS.
SO SO FAR IT&apos;S BEEN PRETTY WELL
RECEIVED AND PRETTY INTERACTIVE
FROM THOSE WHO HAVE
PARTICIPATED IN THE PROCESS
OF BUT WITH THAT I WILL GO
AHEAD AND STOP SHARING MY
SCREEN AND TURN IT BACK OVER TO
THE COMMISSION.
&gt;&gt; I HOPE YOU&apos;LL CONSIDER THE
ROAD DESIGN THAT MY SEVEN YEAR
OLD DID WHICH INVOLVED TWO SIDE
BY SIDE BIKEWAYS WITH A BIKE
LANE ON THE SIDE AND THEN SOME
DOUBLE WIDE SIDEWALKS.
GO AHEAD, JULIE.
&gt;&gt; YEAH, I JUST WANTED TO CHIME
IN ABOUT THE VISION ZERO STUFF.
IT&apos;S REALLY EXCITING TO SEE
THIS MAJOR STREETS CALL MAIN
THING COMING TOGETHER.
ONE THING THAT WE DISCUSSED AT
THE
VISION ZERO MEETING IS THAT
THE IN TERMS OF BEING DATA
DRIVEN WE&apos;VE GOT CRASH DATA AND
WE&apos;VE GOT SOME DATA ABOUT THE
AMOUNT OF TRAFFIC ON THE
STREETS BUT WE DON&apos;T ACTUALLY
HAVE SYSTEMATIC SPEED DATA AND
SO IT SEEMS TO ME THAT THAT
WOULD BE VERY USEFUL TO HAVE
BOTH IN TERMS OF PRIORITIZING
BUT ALSO IN TERMS OF MEASURING
PROGRESS WHEN WE WHEN WE MAKE A
CHANGE TO SEE HOW IT&apos;S HELPED.
AND SO I WONDER IF THAT&apos;S
SOMETHING WE COULD MAYBE
DISCUSS AS A COMMISSION OR
MAYBE ASK STAFF TO MAKE A
PRESENTATION ABOUT WAYS THAT WE
MIGHT BE ABLE TO GATHER
SYSTEMATIC SPEED DATA THAT IT
REALLY FEELS LIKE A GAP TO ME.
THAT&apos;S A GREAT POINT.
SIMILAR TO THAT IS ALSO THE
NEED.
SO WE&apos;VE GOT CAR TRAFFIC BUT I
DON&apos;T KNOW THAT WE HAVE A LOT
OF SYSTEMATIC BIKE OR
PEDESTRIAN COUNTS AND THAT
FEELS LIKE ANOTHER THING THAT
WOULD BE USEFUL TO HAVE NOW SO
THAT LATER WE CAN MAKE
IMPROVEMENTS OTHER ANYTHING&apos;S
OK MOVING RIGHT ALONG.
THANKS ALL OF THOSE OF YOU
WHO&apos;VE BEEN WORKING ON THE
VISION ZERO IMPLEMENTATION WORK
AND IT&apos;S A BIG PROCESS STAFF
REPORT AND IT&apos;S VERY GOOD AND I
SHOULD BE ABLE TO GET THROUGH
THIS IN SHORT ORDER AS WELL.
ALL RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; SO I WILL JUST QUICKLY JUMP
THROUGH OUR PROGRESS REPORT FOR
THE MONTH OF NOVEMBER, SHOW YOU
WHAT HAS CHANGED ANNUAL STREET
RESURFACING PROGRAM IS
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETE.
A LOT OF THINGS YOU&apos;RE GOING TO
SEE ARE GOING TO GO TO BED THIS
TIME OF YEAR BECAUSE ASPHALT
PLANTS CLOSE DOWN, PAINT
DOESN&apos;T CURE AND CEMENT ISN&apos;T
VIABLE EITHER.
SO YOU PRETTY MUCH SEE THERE
THINGS WRAPPED UP OR ARE BEING
POSTPONED GET DONE.
&gt;&gt; SO CHURCH BIDS ARE EXPECTED
TO OPEN IN JANUARY.
SIDEWALK GAPS HISCOCK WAS
POSTPONED TO SPRING OF TWENTY
TWENTY THREE BUT RAYMOND THAT
MONDAY IT LOOKS LIKE THAT MIGHT
ACTUALLY GET GET DONE THIS OR
SO.
&gt;&gt; YEAH WHAT I WHEN I PUT WHAT
I DO THESE UPDATES SOMETIMES
THINGS CHANGE BETWEEN THEN AND
THE ACTUAL MEETING
.
&gt;&gt; ALL RIGHT.
PLATT ROAD I THINK OF MEETING
DATE WAS JUST PICKED IN
MID-DECEMBER.
I THINK IT&apos;S LIKE DECEMBER 13TH
AS SOON AS THAT IS PUBLICLY
ANNOUNCED I&apos;LL BE SURE TO SHARE
THAT WITH THE COMMISSION BARTON
DRIVE AGAIN THIS ONE&apos;S KIND
OF TEETERING ON THE EDGE IF THE
CONTRACTOR IS AVAILABLE OR NOT
TO FINISH THIS WORK BEFORE THE
END OF THE CALENDAR YEAR.
AREHART THERE WAS A PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT HELD ON OCTOBER 20TH
AND WE&apos;RE CURRENTLY LOOKING
THROUGH THAT FEEDBACK AND
MAKING MODIFICATIONS TO THE
DESIGN AS A RESULT 7TH STREET
GREENVIEW SOME OF YOU&apos;VE BEEN
FOLLOWING THIS.
THERE WAS SOME VOLUME AND SPEED
DATA COLLECTED AND POSTED
ONLINE.
OBVIOUSLY THIS COMMISSION HAS
BROACHED THIS ISSUE AT THEIR
LAST TWO MEETINGS IN SEPTEMBER
AND OCTOBER .
THE RECOMMENDATION DID GO TO
CITY COUNCIL AT THEIR MEETING
LAST WEEK.
THE RESOLUTION THAT THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION
SPONSORED WAS MODIFIED AND
PRETTY MUCH THE DIRECTION AND
I&apos;M PARAPHRASING HERE SO
FORGIVE ME IF I GET THE WORDS
WRONG.
EXACTLY.
BUT KIND OF DIRECTING STAFF TO
GO BACK TO THE DRAWING BOARD
AND LOOK AT MORE OF A FOCUS ON
SPEED MANAGEMENT KIND
OF CONSISTENT WITH WHAT WE JUST
DISCUSSED AND REALLY SEE WHAT
SORT OF APPROPRIATE DESIGN
COULD COME OUT OF THAT AND THEN
SOME ADDITIONAL ENGAGEMENT ON
THAT PROJECT AS WELL.
AND I THINK THERE&apos;S ALSO THE
UNDERSTANDING THAT THE PROJECT
IS ALSO PUSHED BACK FROM A
TIMELINE PERSPECTIVE AS WELL BY
YEAR HIS MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE
THE PROJECT IS OUT TO BID US
STATE AND HILL PRELIMINARY
PLANS WERE SUBMITTED TO
MICHIGAN DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND
INNOVATION UPDATE.
THE BIG NEWS IS THAT THE
CLIMATE VILLAGE PASSED ON
NOVEMBER 8TH AND I THINK SOME
OF YOU HEARD ME ALLUDE TO IT
EARLIER THAT WE DO EXPECT SOME
MONEY TO HELP WITH NON
MOTORIZED TRANSPORTATION
IMPROVEMENTS SINCE THAT IS A
KEY STRATEGY IN THE
SUSTAINABILITY PLAN.
SO SOME OF THAT IS STILL BEING
WORKED OUT BECAUSE IT&apos;S FRESHLY
PASSED.
SO MORE TO COME ON THAT STREET
LIGHTS WE&apos;RE UP TO OVER A
THOUSAND THAT IT HAS FIXED THIS
YEAR.
TRAFFIC CALMING IS REALLY
PICKING UP PACE GRANGER IS
GRANGER FORSAKES PACKARD KICKED
OFF AND GRANGER FULLMER AND
BALDWIN ARE ABOUT TO KICK OFF
AND PROJECT WEBSITES HAVE BEEN
CREATED FOR THOSE.
ALL RIGHT.
WE JUST TALKED ABOUT THE
TRANSPORTATION PLAN
IMPLEMENTATION PLAN OR THE CITY
MANAGEMENT.
SOME OF THE ENGAGEMENTS WE DID
WE RECEIVED OVER ONE HUNDRED
KIND OF DIRECT TOUCHES WITH THE
COMMUNITY OF THE NEXT MEETING
OF DIVISION&apos;S YEAR
IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE
DECEMBER 12TH.
&gt;&gt; I SHOULD NOTE THE NOVEMBER
14TH MEETING WAS ACTUALLY
CANCELED AND QUICK BUILD
PROJECTS WE RAN INTO SOME
OF THE SAME PROBLEMS AS OTHER
PROJECTS KIND OF RAN OUT
OF GOOD WEATHER AND TIME AND SO
SOME OF THOSE ARE BEING
POSTPONED TO EARLY NEXT YEAR AS
WELL.
ALL RIGHT.
&gt;&gt; EDUCATION AND ENCOURAGEMENT
WE ARE WORKING WITH THE RIDE ON
AND TO GET DOWNTOWN PROGRAM FOR
CONCRETE, A COLD AND MAYBE SOME
OTHER BOLSTERING UP AND
ENGAGEMENT AND ENCOURAGEMENT
EVENTS SUCH AS BIKE TO WORK
MONTH MAY AS WELL.
WE&apos;RE ALREADY STARTING TO THINK
THINK ABOUT THAT MORE TO COME
ON THAT SPACE AND THEN THE RIDE
PROVIDED AN UPDATE WHICH I
ALWAYS FEEL BAD STEALING FORCED
UNDER BUT IT LOOKS LIKE
RIDERSHIP IS UP TO ABOUT SIXTY
FIVE PERCENT OF PRE PANDEMIC
LEVELS.
YOU JUST GOT A DETAILED REPORT
ON THE ALTERNATIVE PROPULSION
STUDY AND THOSE ENGAGEMENT
OPPORTUNITIES THAT WERE
AVAILABLE TO THE COMMUNITY AND
THAT INCLUDES MY QUICK SYNOPSIS
.
GREAT.
THANK YOU.
NEXT UP WE HAVE LIAISON REPORTS
TO ANY COMMISSIONERS WHO SERVE
AS A LIAISON.
&gt;&gt; ANOTHER BODY OR ORGANIZATION
ARE INVITED TO PROVIDE BRIEF
REPORTS AND UPDATES.
NO ONE I&apos;LL MAKE REALLY BRIEF
AVAILABLE T.S.A. ATC ONE ON
STADIUM ERIKA SORRY YOUR
THUNDER THAT ONE PASSED I THINK
IT WAS YESTERDAY AS IT WAS
YESTERDAY TWENTY FIVE TWENTY
AND TWENTY FIVE FORTY PONTIAC
TRAIL THAT&apos;S AN ANNEXATION
THAT&apos;S FOR THAT BIG ROBERTSON
HOMES IT&apos;S THE ANNEXATION IT&apos;S
GOING TO GO TO CITY COUNCIL
NEXT BUT IT JUST PASSED THROUGH
SO THAT&apos;S A DEVELOPMENT THAT IS
OFFERING BASICALLY TO DO A
ROUNDABOUT AT PONTIAC TRAIL AND
JUVONEN SO THAT&apos;S LIKE WAY WAY
UP THERE ON THE NORTH.
SO JUST BECAUSE WE&apos;VE ALWAYS
TRAFFIC ISSUES UP THERE JUST
KIND OF BRING THAT TO YOUR GUYS
ATTENTION.
NEIL, THE ONE THAT&apos;S REALLY
THAT WAS YESTERDAY WAS FIVE
THIRTY NORTH DIVISION THAT&apos;S
JUST GOING TO BE A FEW UNITS.
IT&apos;S NOT GOING TO INCREASE
INTENSITY BUT SUPPOSED TO
INCREASE THE RESIDENTIAL FUEL
GOING UP BASICALLY DIVISION
STREET KIND LIKE NEAR WHERE
THAT BRIDGES.
SO I&apos;M TRYING TO THINK ABOUT
IT.
IT&apos;LL BE SIX PARKING SPOTS FOR
TWENTY FOUR UNITS.
IT&apos;S ONLY KIND OF THING THAT
PIQUED MY MIND.
SO ANYWAYS ONE I THINK IT&apos;S
REALLY ALL I HAD AS FAR AS
TRANSPORTATION THINKS MOLLY I
SEE LARRY&apos;S HANDS UP OK WE&apos;LL
DO LARRY AND THEN ERICA IT IS
YEAH OUR COMMISSION ON
DISABILITY ISSUES IS LOOKING AT
CROSSWALKS AND THERE WERE SOME
BROUGHT TO OUR ATTENTION IN
PARTICULAR HARBORVIEW AND
ACROSS SOME OF THE CROSSWALKS
THERE THE CURBS ARE PUT IN IN
SUCH A WAY THAT WITH RUMBLE
STRIPS ON THE CURBS IF YOU ARE
VISUALLY IMPAIRED IN PARTICULAR
YOU CAN BE LED THE WRONG WAY
AND INSTEAD OF GOING BEING ABLE
TO GO STRAIGHT ACROSS THE CURB,
IT&apos;LL LEAD YOU INTO THE STREET,
INTO THE ROAD AND IT GETS A
LITTLE MORE COMPLICATED THAN
THAT.
BUT THE THING IS WE WANT TO GET
WE WANT TO PUT A RESOLUTION
INTO CITY HALL AND WE WANT TO
NOT ONLY GO ADA SO WE DON&apos;T
REALLY WANT TO BE ADA
ACCEPTABLE BUT WE ALSO WANT
THEM TO BE BEST PRACTICES
ACCEPTABLE.
THAT&apos;S WHAT WE&apos;RE WORKING
GREAT
.
AND IF THAT&apos;S SOMETHING THAT
WHERE YOU WOULD WANT
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION TO
POTENTIALLY VOTE ON THE
RESOLUTION AS WELL, WE CAN WE
CAN GET THAT ON AN AGENDA SO
YOU CAN JUST KEEP US POSTED
ABOUT HOW THAT MOVES FORWARD.
&gt;&gt; I&apos;LL DO THAT.
&gt;&gt; THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT, ERIKA, THANKS.
&gt;&gt; JUST A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT
CHIESI ONE OBVIOUSLY THAT
FORWARD ON STADIUM ONE OF THE
BIG PIECES THE FEEDBACK THAT I
RECEIVED AND THIS IS
REPRESENTATIVE ALSO JUST KIND
OF WHAT MY OBSERVATIONS AS WELL
WAS THERE WAS A REAL INTEREST
IN MAKING SURE THAT AS WE AS WE
MOVE FORWARD THE ZONING THAT
WE&apos;RE ALSO MAKING MAKING SURE
THAT WE HAVE THE ACCOMMODATIONS
THAT ARE THERE FOR PEDESTRIANS
AND FOR TRANSIT USERS AND SO
RIGHT CURRENTLY RIGHT NOW THE
RIGHT OF WAY IS PRETTY NARROW
ALONG THE STADIUM AND SO ONE
OF THE RESOLUTION I AM WORKING
ON WITH FOR MONDAY&apos;S COUNCIL
MEETING WOULD BE BASICALLY
TRYING TO CORRECT FOR THAT
MOVING
FORWARD AND THAT
ACTUALLY MIGHT HAVE TO DO MORE
WITH UNDERSTANDING WHAT OUR
RIGHT OF WAY VISION IS FOR THAT
CORRIDOR AND THEN ALLOWING FOR
THE SET BACKS TO ACCOMMODATE
FOR THAT SO THAT WE DON&apos;T END
UP WITH NOT ENOUGH SPACE IN THE
FUTURE FOR THE THE TYPE OF SORT
OF TRANSPORTATION
ACCOMMODATIONS THAT WE WANT TO
HAVE ALONG THAT BORDER.
SO BECAUSE OF THAT THAT&apos;S
THAT&apos;S MOVING FORWARD AND THEN
ON THE SEVENTH AND GREENVIEW
PROJECT I GUESS I WANTED TO
JUST SINCE COUNCIL ENDED UP
DEBATING A LITTLE BIT FROM THE
RECOMMENDATION OF STAFFING AND
PLANNING COMMISSION JUST WANTED
TOUGHER TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION.
I JUST WANTED TO MAKE MAKE IT
CLEAR THAT YOU KNOW, I THINK
THAT WHAT NERVE COUNCIL MEMBERS
SORT OF IDENTIFIED IS THAT
REALLY THERE&apos;S AN INTEREST IN A
SORT OF A POLICY SHIFT ABOUT
HOW WE APPROACH HOW WE APPROACH
TRAFFIC CALMING POTENTIALLY IN
THE CITY AND MORE OF AN
INTEGRATION UP FRONT ON ON SOME
OF THIS.
AND SO I THINK HOPEFULLY THAT
COINCIDES WITH THE WORK THAT
THE TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION&apos;S
TRAFFIC COMING SUBCOMMITTEE IS
IS BEGINNING TO INVESTIGATE AND
LOOK AT AS WELL.
BUT YOU KNOW, I CERTAINLY DON&apos;T
SEE IT AS A CHALLENGE IN TERMS
OF WHAT GOT PRESENTED BUT WHAT
STAFF PRESENTED OR WHAT
PLANNING TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION ENDED UP
RECOMMENDING.
I THINK IT WAS JUST
IDENTIFICATION OF MAYBE
POLICIES THAT WE&apos;D WANT TO
SHIFT MOVING FORWARD AND ALSO
FOR ANYBODY WHO HAPPENED TO BE
LISTENING TO THAT CITY COUNCIL
MEETING, THERE WAS A LOT
OF PUBLIC FEEDBACK FROM
RESIDENTS AND I FEEL LIKE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION ENDED
UP GETTING THERE WERE A LOT
OF PLEASANT COMMENTS THERE AND
SOME OF THEM WERE NOT SO
PLEASANT FROM THE COUNCIL TABLE
ITSELF.
&gt;&gt; AND SO I JUST WANT TO SAY
FROM MY PERSPECTIVE THANK YOU
TO ALL OF YOU FOR ALL OF THE
WORK THAT YOU&apos;RE DOING.
IT&apos;S INCREDIBLE THAT YOUR
VOLUNTEERING AND DEDICATING
YOUR TIME TO MAKING OUR CITY
BETTER.
SO THANK YOU VERY MUCH AND
THANKS TO STAFF AS WELL.
THANK YOU.
ALL RIGHT.
MOVING ON TO GENERAL COMMISSION
MEMBER COMMUNICATIONS ALL
COMMISSIONERS ARE INVITED TO
PROVIDE REPORTS AND UPDATES.
ALL RIGHT.
SO A QUICK CALL FOR AGENDA
ITEMS FOR THE NEXT MEETING.
THINGS THAT WE&apos;VE GOT ON THE
DOCKET COMING UP.
IT LOOKS LIKE WE&apos;VE GOT THE
VISION ZERO IMPLEMENTATION PLAN
UPDATE FLAT ROAD
RECONFIGURATION.
OUR ANNUAL REPORT ARE TWENTY
TWENTY THREE WORK PLAN.
SO START THINKING ABOUT WHAT
YOU WANT US TO BE DIGGING INTO
NEXT YEAR POLICY AGENDA INPUT.
I FEEL LIKE THAT WE JUST DID
THAT AND NOW WE&apos;RE DOING IT
AGAIN AND I KNOW WOMEN ARE
THERE ANY OTHER ANY OTHER ONES?
&gt;&gt; NO I THINK THAT&apos;S WHAT WE&apos;RE
TRACKING AT THE MOMENT ALWAYS
SUBJECT TO CHANGE BUT THAT
SEEMS TO BE WHAT&apos;S ON THE
DOCKET.
AND MOLLY, IF I MAY REAL
QUICKLY BECAUSE I&apos;M REMINDED
THAT THE TWENTY TWENTY TWO IN
YOUR REPORT I&apos;D LOVE TO DO A
SCREEN CAPTURE YOU YOU HEARD ME
WARN YOU EARLIER SINCE WE HAVE
A PRETTY GOOD SHOWING OF OUR
COMMISSIONERS HERE WE USED TO
DO IN PERSON GATHER AROUND THE
DENHA SORT OF THING BUT VIRTUAL
SO YOU GET YOUR PEARLY WHITES
OUT, GET YOUR YOUR SMILE GO IN
AND MAYBE CHRIS JUST FOR
REDUNDANCY SAKE ON THE COUNT
OF THREE WE&apos;LL JUST DO A SCREEN
CAPTURE AND IF YOU COULD DO ONE
AND I CAN DO ONE JUST IN CASE
WE ONE OF THOSE RUNS INTO A
TECHNICAL DIFFICULTY SO.
ALL RIGHT, EVERYBODY READY?
ALL RIGHT.
THREE TO ONE CHEESE
.
RIGHT.
LET ME JUST SEE IF MINE CAME
THROUGH MARVELOUS.
&gt;&gt; PERFECT.
THANK YOU ALL.
EXCELLENT.
ALL RIGHT.
OUR NEXT MEETING AND TAKING
NOTE OF THIS ONE BECAUSE
DIFFERENT NEXT MEETING IS
SCHEDULED FOR THURSDAY,
DECEMBER 15TH AT FOUR PM.
SO THAT AWKWARD THURSDAY TIME
WE&apos;VE GOT TO AVOID VARIOUS
HOLIDAYS AND IF THERE ARE NO
OBJECTIONS, WE&apos;LL ADJOURN
TONIGHT&apos;S MEETING.
ALL RIGHT.
MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
THANKS EVERYONE.
THANKS EVERYBODY.
EVERYBODY HAVE A GREAT NIGHT